Civil Engineering Technology
CVET-140 
Materials of Construction
A study of common construction materials in civil engineering with particular emphasis on
Portland cement concrete and asphalt cement concrete. Aggregates, Portland cement, and
asphalt cement (each an ingredient in the concretes) are studied extensively. Mass-volume
relationships are explored in relation to these materials. An overview of laboratory testing procedures for evaluating these materials is provided. Important properties of masonry, steel, and
wood products are also discussed. (Co-requisites: CVET-141 or equivalent course.) Lecture
2, Credits 2 (Fall)
CVET-141 
Materials of Construction Laboratory
The Materials of Construction Laboratory will be taken concurrently with CVET-140. Standard
laboratory tests will be performed for evaluating the properties of aggregate, Portland cement
concrete, asphalt cement concrete, and mortar. Mix design procedures for Portland cement
concrete and asphalt cement concrete will be learned and used. An introduction to green
building materials will be provided. (Co-requisites: CVET-140 or equivalent course.) Lab,
Credits 1 (Fall)
CVET-150 
Computer Aided Design and Drafting
Introduction to engineering graphics as a means of communication in the technical fields.
The course is laboratory oriented and provides the student with basic skills to create and edit
professional 2D & 3D drawings with this comprehensive first course in the use of computer
aided design and drafting (CADD) software for (Mechanical, Architectural and Civil drawings). The course assumes no prior knowledge of engineering drawing or CADD. Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 2 (Spring)
CVET-160 Surveying
Introduction to fundamentals of surveying. Topics include: note taking; differential leveling;
vertical and horizontal measurement; traversing; topographic mapping; horizontal, vertical,
compound and reverse curves; earthwork; and GPS/GIS. (Co-requisites: CVET-161 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CVET-161 
Surveying Laboratory
Students apply the fundamentals of surveying to field exercises using modern surveying
equipment. Field exercises include differential leveling, cross sections, traversing, topographic mapping, horizontal curve layout, vertical curve design, earthwork estimation, use of data
collectors, and GPS/GIS. (Co-requisites: CVET-160 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)

2	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CVET-170 
Elements of Building Construction
Elements and details of building construction, both residential and commercial, are explored.
The course does not focus on design, but rather on specific building components, and on how
these components work together to create a functional building. Some of the topics include:
foundations, wood light frame, heavy timber frame, steel, concrete, masonry, glass, roofing,
cladding systems, and interior finishes. The role of building codes in design and construction is introduced. "Green" building materials and systems are also introduced. (CVET-BS)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-180 
Civil Engineering Graphics
The objective of this course is to develop in the student an understanding of plans and drawings
in civil engineering projects such as site development, structures, hydraulic structures, water
and wastewater transport and treatment facilities, and transportation facilities. Students will
also understand how related disciplines: architecture, mechanical and electrical engineering,
and landscape architecture; are incorporated into construction drawings. Students develop an understanding of the technical and legal purpose of plans and how to assemble them.
(Co-requisites: CVET-181 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
CVET-181 
Civil Engineering Graphics Lab
The purpose of this course is to provide students with hands on learning of fundamental and
innovative tools in the area of civil engineering graphics. Students will apply information from
the co-requisite to understand how construction drawing sets and drawing components are
organized and generated. Spreadsheet methods will be used to solve design problems and building information modeling software will be introduced in the DDL computer lab. (Co-requisites:
CVET-180 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
CVET-210 Statics
An introduction to the analysis of static structures covering free-body diagrams, forces, moments, vectors, equilibrium, friction, and analysis of structures and truss members.
Applications are drawn from civil engineering technology. (Prerequisites: PHYS-111 or PHYS211 or PHYS-211A or equivalent course.) Lecture, Recitation 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-230 
Elementary Structures
Applications of the principles of statics and strength of materials to the analysis and design of
basic structural elements in buildings such as beams, T-beams, columns, slabs, and footings.
Topics include analysis of gravity loads in buildings, along with analysis and design of both
structural steel and reinforced concrete members found in buildings. The Allowable Stress
Design approach (AISC) is used for steel, while the ACI code is used for concrete. Design and
analysis of steel connections are covered also. (Prerequisites: CVET-220 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-240 
Elementary Soil Mechanics
An introduction to soil mechanics and its application to problems encountered in civil engineering design and construction. Major topics include soil properties and classification,
weight-volume relationships, compaction/ground improvement, groundwater flow, stresses
in soils, settlement analysis, and shear strength. (Prerequisites: CVET-220 or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: CVET-241 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-241 
Elementary Soil Mechanics Lab
The Soil Mechanics Laboratory will be taken concurrently with CVET-240. Standard laboratory tests will be performed for evaluating the properties of soils including gradation, plasticity,
compaction, permeability, compressibility, and shear strength. (Co-requisites: CVET-240 or
equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
CVET-251 
Hydraulics Lab
Experimental study of principle physical properties of liquids and major laws of fluid mechanics. Students will conduct several experiments that illustrate the theory and design principles
taught in lecture. (Co-requisites: CVET-250 or equivalent course.CVET-250 Coreq) Lab,
Credits 1 (Fall)
CVET-300 
Land Development Computer Applications
The purpose of this course is to provide the student with an introduction to Civil 3D software
and how to use the application and its tools to create standardized civil engineering and drafting
projects. The course enables students to complete transportation, site, sewer, storm drain, and
subdivision projects quickly, while using the tools to dynamically link and generate automatic
design updates. (Prerequisites: CVET-150 and ((CVET-160 and CVET-161) or 0608-340) and
((CVET-180 and CVET-181) or 0608-220) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 2 (Fall)
CVET-332 
Structural Analysis with STAAD
Introduction of classical and modern computational techniques to analyze statically determinate and indeterminate structures. Topics include beams, 2-D trusses, 2-D frames, cables and
arches, moving loads and influence lines, approximate methods and moment distribution.
Computer-aided structural analysis using commercial structural analysis software "STAAD"
is involved. (Prerequisites: CVET-230 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)

College of Applied Science and Technology

CVET-400 
Transportation Engineering
This course exposes students to the fields of highway, traffic engineering, airport and rail
engineering. The areas of administration, planning, design, construction, maintenance and
operation are covered. After the introductory material is presented, stress is put on specific skills needed in these fields, including highway, rail and airport standards; geometry and
alignment; traffic signal timing and design, drainage; earthwork; safety standards; and structures. (Prerequisites: CVET-150, CVET-160, CVET-180 and CVET-300 or equivalent course.
Co-requisite: CVET-401) Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
CVET-401 
Transportation Engineering Lab
Students apply the fundamentals of highway design in the planning and design of a curbed
highway, parking lot, and the necessary stormwater management facility. Students will use
AutoCAD Civil 3D software as well as traffic engineering software that is commonly used at
transportation agencies. (Prerequisites: CVET-300 or equivalent course. Co-requisites: CVET401 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
CVET-412 
Pavement Design
This elective course provides detailed coverage of the engineering aspects of asphalt and
Portland cement concrete pavement design, bringing together relevant concepts from construction materials, soil mechanics and transportation engineering. The course includes
design of new pavements and also addresses the topics of the assessment, rehabilitation, and
recycling of existing pavements. In addition to focusing on highway/roadway pavements, an
overview of airport pavements is presented. Problems are attacked in a practical manner, utilizing design guides and expertise from national organizations and state highway departments.
(Prerequisites: ((CVET-140 and CVET-141) or 0608-330) and ((CVET-240 and CVET-241) or
0608-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-414 
Traffic Analysis
The fundamentals of traffic engineering, traffic operation and control are covered. The design
of intersection control is covered. Topics included are, driver/vehicle characteristics, traffic
control devices, traffic stream characteristics, statistical applications in traffic engineering, traffic volume studies and characteristics, vehicle routing, speed changes, speed reduction zones,
fixed time signal control and related topics. (Prerequisites: ((CVET-400 and CVET-401) or
0608-530) or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3
CVET-421 
Land Use Planning
The environmental and social aspects as well as the engineering and cost considerations of
land-use planning are covered. Topics included are zoning concepts, master plans, subdivision regulations and design criteria, flood plains, environmentally sensitive areas, wetlands,
other planning and control tools, solar access planning, and urban revitalization. Students are
involved in an independent project consisting of a concept design for a subdivision or other
land-use project. Extensive use is made of field trips and attendance at appropriate meetings
or work sessions. (Prerequisites: CVET-300 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3
(Spring)
CVET-422 
Resource Recovery and Waste Management
An introduction to the civil engineering aspects of dealing with resource recovery and “waste”
management, with a focus on source reduction and beneficial resource recovery. Topics covered
are the history of the problems, the resulting societal reaction and legislation, and present day
handling, minimizing, and recovering or disposing of materials historically treated as “wastes.”
Emphasis is placed on those aspects in which the civil engineer plays a prominent role such as
material recovery facilities, municipal solid waste landfills and hazardous waste permanent
storage facilities, land application of municipal wastewater biosolids, composting, and other
resource recovery and environmental protection engineering projects. Use is made of lectures,
reading materials, outside speakers, field trips, and certain projects. (This class is restricted to
students with at least 4th year standing in the CVET-BS program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CVET-423 
GIS for CETEMS
This course examines the fundamentals of geographic information systems and their application in the fields of civil engineering and environmental management. It emphasizes
the application of GIS technology to problems such as, but not limited to, water resource
management, asset management, environmental impact assessments, urban planning, and
transportation. (Enrollment in this course is restricted to student with at least 4th year standing in CVET-BS or ESHS-BS.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3
CVET-424 
Building Information Modeling with Revit
The primary objective of the Revit course is to teach students the concepts of Building
Information Modeling (BIM) technology and introduce the tools for parametric building
design and documentation using Revit Architecture. Students will be able to create full 3D
architectural project models and generate working drawings. The course focuses on design
development tools - building the 3D model with foundation, walls, windows, doors, floors,
roofs, stairs, creating reflected ceiling plans and furniture plans. Students will add views and
annotation to the sheets to create a set of construction documents. (Prerequisites: CVET-150
or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

CVET-431 
Structural Design - Steel
Design of structural members and frames and their connections in steel structures. Topic
include principles of structural design, structural loads and systems, steel grade and shapes,
tension members, columns, non-composite and composite beams, beam-columns, column base
plates, bolted connections and welded connections. The use of AISC Steel Manual is emphasized and a comprehensive group design project is assigned. Some computer work is involved.
(Prerequisites: CVET-330 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CVET-432 
Structural Design - Reinforced Concrete
Design of members and frames of reinforced concrete. Topics include principles of structural
design; properties of concrete and reinforcement; design of slabs, beams, columns and footings;
and introduction to pre-stressed concrete. Emphasis is on the use of the ACI code, and a comprehensive group design project is assigned. Some computer work is involved. (Prerequisites:
CVET-330 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-433 
Structural Timber Design
Design wood structures. Topics include properties of structural lumber, design of wood structural members including beams, columns, beam-columns, trusses, studs, plywood diaphragms
and shear walls, and design of structural member connections. Emphasis is on the use of
NDC Wood Design Package. A comprehensive group design project. Some computer work is
involved. (Prerequisites: CVET-330 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CVET-434 
Design of Highway Bridges
Design concrete and steel bridges. Topics include types of bridges; design loads on bridges;
design of prestressed concrete girders using CONSPAN; design of steel girders using MDX;
design of reinforced concrete deck; design of abutments and wing walls; design of foundations; and introduction to multi-span bridges. Emphasis is on the use of the AASHTO LRFD
code and bridge design software, and a comprehensive group design project is assigned. Some
computer work is involved. (Prerequisites: CVET-431 and CVET-432 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-435 
Prestressed Concrete
This course focuses on the fundamental concepts of prestressed concrete design. Topics include
prestressing systems, types of prestressing, materials used in prestressed concrete, analysis and
design of pre- and post-tensioned systems, design of connections, losses in prestress. Emphasis
is given on the use of the current industry standards and a design project. (Prerequisites: CVET330 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-436 
Masonry Structures
This course focuses on the fundamental concepts of structural design with masonry elements.
Topics include historical perspective of masonry technology, materials used in masonry construction, general design requirements for masonry, structural design of unreinforced and
reinforced masonry elements, masonry construction practices, repairs and improvements to
masonry walls. Emphasis is given on the use of the building codes for masonry structures and
a comprehensive group design project. (Prerequisites: ((CVET-140 and CVET-141) or 0608330) and CVET-330 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CVET-437 
Principles of Dynamics in Civil Engineering Technology
Study of the basic principles of engineering dynamics. Topics include kinematics of particles,
force, mass, and acceleration, work and energy, force-impulse and momentum, and an introduction to vibrations and structural dynamics. Applications to practical engineering problems
are emphasized. (Prerequisites: CVET-332 and MATH-172 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 2 (Spring)
CVET-440 
Foundation Engineering
Study of the geotechnical engineering aspects of foundation design. Focus is on bearing capacity analysis and spread footing design, mat foundations, pile capacity and pile foundation
design, drilled shafts, lateral earth pressures and retaining wall design, and an introduction to
slope stability analysis. (Prerequisites: (CVET-240 and CVET-241) or 0608-360 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
CVET-441 
Soil Retention and Stabilization Methods
In this course students will develop skills for the selection, design, and construction of specialized soil retention and soil stabilization systems used in geotechnical engineering. The systems
and techniques covered will include specialty retaining walls including anchored bulkheads,
MSE walls, and segmental walls; temporary excavation support systems including soldier pile
and lagging and steel sheet piling with tieback anchors or internal bracing; soil improvement
and reinforcement including wick drains with preload, stone columns/aggregate piers, and
geosynthetics/geogrids; and other current ground improvement techniques including grouting. (Prerequisites: CVET-440 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

3

College of Applied Science and Technology

CVET-450 
Principles of Water and Wastewater Treatment
An introduction to water and wastewater treatment, interpretation of analyzed physical, chemical, and biological aqueous characteristics associated with the design and operation of treatment
processes. Fundamental principles and applications of physical, chemical, and biological processes employed in the treatment of drinking water and sanitary wastewater will be covered.
Fundamental components and design procedures for stormwater and sanitary sewer systems
will be introduced. (Prerequisites: CVET-250 and CVET-251 and CHMG-122 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CVET-451 
Design of Water and Wastewater Treatment Facilities
Hydraulic, biological, and chemical principles of water and wastewater treatment processes are
applied to the design of municipal treatment works. Process, plant design, and construction elements are stressed. (Prerequisites: CVET-450 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-453 
Stormwater Management
This course focuses on the fundamental design concepts of surface water hydrology and how
these concepts are applied to the management of stormwater for municipal and development
projects. Topics include rainfall/runoff relationships, groundwater hydrology, hydrographs, soil
erosion & sediment control, storm sewer design, and green infrastructure. Practical engineering
procedures, using desktop and state-of-the-practice hydraulic & hydrologic software, are introduced to analyze existing conditions and design new solutions. (Prerequisites: CVET-250 and
CVET-251 or equivalent courses.CVET-250 & CVET-251 Prereq) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-461 
Construction Cost Estimating I
An introduction to direct cost estimating for construction projects. The estimating techniques
covered include quantity take-off, labor productivity, and pricing (labor, material, and equipment). Drawings, sketches, and specifications are used as a basis for developing quantities
involving site work, concrete, masonry, steel, carpentry, and finishes. Students also use software tools to aid in developing takeoff quantities. Different estimate structures and various
types of estimates are examined. Direct and indirect construction costs are explored along with
approaches for estimating overhead costs and profit. (Prerequisites: CVET-170 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
CVET-462 
Construction Project Management
An introduction to construction management. Project administrative roles and relationships
among the various project team participants are explored. Topics include specifics of construction project start-up including procurement, project buyout, and job site layout and control.
Subcontracts and relationship with subcontractors are explored. Construction related documentation including contract documents, submittals, information requests, change orders,
progress payments, bonds, insurances and project closeout is discussed. Safety, quality, and
project closeout are also covered. (Prerequisites: CVET-461 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-464 
Construction Planning, Scheduling and Control
This course covers planning, organization, scheduling, and control of construction projects.
The components of construction project planning are examined. Students are exposed to and
gain practice in using both the arrow-diagramming method and the Critical path Method
(CPM) in scheduling and monitoring the progress of construction projects. Cost control and
resource allocation/resource management are explored. (Prerequisites: CVET-170 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3
CVET-465 
Contracts and Specifications
This course includes a fundamental overview of contract law, followed by the application of
this material in the contracts for construction. Subsequently, the student is exposed to construction specifications. Substantial use is made of actual documents such as those of the New
York State Department of Transportation, The Construction Specification Institute and trade
standards such as ANSI, ASTM, and others. Students are required to develop and assemble a
mock-up set of contract documents. Arbitration, design-build, and partnering are discussed.
(This class is restricted to students with at least 4th year standing in the CVET-BS program.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CVET-489 
Special Topics in CET
Subject offerings of new and developing areas of knowledge in civil engineering technology
intended to augment the existing curriculum. Special Topics courses are offered periodically.
Watch for titles in the course listing each semester. Lecture 3, Credits 1 - 3 (Spring, Summer)
CVET-499 
Civil Engineering Technology Co-op
One semester or summer block of appropriate work experience in a related industry. (CVETBS) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

4	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CVET-500 
CET Capstone
A capstone course in Civil Engineering Technology. This course builds on and integrates the
engineering concepts developed in prior course work into the complete design of a major civil
engineering project. The course will require a written and an oral presentation of the completed design to include, where appropriate, plans and specifications. (Prerequisites: CVET-400,
(CVET-431 or CVET-432), CVET-440 and CVET-450 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)
CVET-599 
Independent Study
A supervised investigation within a civil engineering technology area of student interest.
Consent of the faculty sponsor and departmental approval are required. Students are limited
to a maximum of three semester credit hours of independent study projects and two sections
in any semester, plus a maximum of six semester credit hours of independent study credits
earned toward degree requirements. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Spring, Summer)

Computer Engineering Technology
CPET-121 
Computational Problem Solving I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence in computational problem solving of engineering and scientific problems. The problems solved will stress the application of sequence,
selection, repetitive, invocation operations and arrays. The development of proper testing
procedures to ensure computational accuracy will be stressed. Students, upon successful completion of this course, will be able to analyze introductory engineering and scientific problems,
design, code, test, and document procedural software solutions. Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3
(Spring)
CPET-141 
Digital Fundamentals
An introduction to digital electronics, emphasizing the concepts that are fundamental to any
digital system: number systems, truth tables, Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps, combinational
and sequential logic, digital arithmetic, TTL/CMOS logic families and SSI, MSI and PLD device
implementation. Students, upon completion of this course, will have the necessary skills to
analyze and design introductory combinational and sequential logic circuits. (Co-requisites:
CPET-142 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
CPET-142 
Digital Fundamentals Lab
Laboratory work to complement the lecture material covered in Digital Fundamentals. The
laboratories are designed to illustrate concepts, reinforce analysis and design skills, and develop instrumentation techniques associated with the lecture topics. Students, upon completion
of this course, will have the necessary skills to analyze, design, and implement introductory
combinational and sequential logic circuits. (Co-requisites: CPET-141 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
CPET-201 
Microcontroller Systems
This course studies the structure and applications of microcontroller systems. Emphasis will be
on: hardware architecture and structures, programming, memory organization/mapping, system timing, typical peripherals and interfacing, the interrupt structure, input/output methods,
small system design and applications. On successful completion of the course students will have
the necessary skills to design, analyze, program and document basic microcontroller systems.
(Prerequisites: CPET-121 and ((CPET-141 and CPET 142) or 0618-301) or equivalent courses.
Co-Requisites: CPET-202 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
CPET-202 
Microcontroller Systems Lab
This course implements the techniques and concepts developed in Microcontroller Systems.
Emphasis will be placed on the use and applications of an Integrated Developers Environment
(IDE) system and microcontroller design, programming, debugging, simulation, implementation and demonstration of basic microcontroller systems using the features of Single Board
Computer Development System (SBC). Students on successful completion of the course will
have the necessary skills to analyze, design, program, debug, simulate and implement basic
microcontroller systems. (Co-requisites: CPET-201 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
CPET-241 
Digital Systems Design
After a review of concepts covered in Digital Fundamentals and Digital Fundamentals
Laboratory , this course will present modern digital design techniques. Topics will include:
advanced digital circuits, programmable logic devices, finite state machines, hardware description languages and implementation technologies. Students, upon completion of this course, will
have the necessary skills to analyze, and design advanced combinational and sequential logic
circuits targeted for programmable logic devices. In addition, students will be introduced to
hardware description languages and exposed to digital logic systems fabrication methodologies
and processes (Prerequisites: ((CPET-141 and CPET 142) or 0618-301) or equivalent courses.
Co-Requisites: CPET-242 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Applied Science and Technology

CPET-242 
Digital Syst Design Lab
Laboratory work to complement the lecture material covered in Digital Systems Design. The
laboratories are designed to illustrate concepts, reinforce analysis and design skills, and develop
instrumentation techniques associated with the lecture topics. Students, upon completion of
this course, will have the necessary skills to analyze, design, and implement advanced combinational and sequential logic circuits targeted for programmable logic devices. In addition,
students will be introduced to a hardware description languages and exposed to digital logic
systems fabrication methodologies and processes. (Co-requisites: CPET-241 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
CPET-321 
Computational Problem Solving II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence in computational problem solving of
engineering and scientific problems. The problems solved will stress the application of data
structures and object oriented classes. Data encapsulation, data management, and design
robustness will be stressed. Students, upon successful completion of this course, will be able
to analyze complex engineering and scientific problems, design, code, test, and document
objected-oriented software solutions. (Prerequisites: CPET-121 or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
CPET-341 
Hardware Description Language
This course is a more in depth coverage of current logic design and verification methodologies
using a modern hardware description language (HDL). Topics include: coding for different
levels of abstraction; implementation of arithmetic circuits and finite state machines; hierarchical designs; reusable component design; data and control path; best coding practices; design
constraints and verification. Students, upon completion of this course, will have the necessary
skills to analyze and design advanced hardware descriptions of combinational and sequential
logic circuits using design and verification best practices and methodologies. (Prerequisites:
(CPET-241 and CPET-242) or 0618-438 or equivalent courses. Co-Requisites: CPET-342 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)

CPET-561 
Embedded Systems Design I
This is an embedded systems architecture and design course. Microprocessor, as well as system level design principles will be analyzed from both a hardware and software perspective.
Assembly language and C are used to develop software applications for a 32-bit embedded
processor. Application software emphasizes interrupt driven operation and peripheral interfacing. A hardware description language is used to design and debug embedded components
for an FPGA-based system. Students, upon successful completion of the course, will be able
to design and debug hardware and software systems, evaluate design trade-offs and choose
the best design solution, and perform functional and timing analysis of an embedded system.
(Prerequisites: ((CPET-201 and CPET-202) or 0618-303) and ((CPET-341 and CPET-342) or
0618-439) with grades of C or better or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 4 (Spring)
CPET-563 
Embedded Systems Design II
This project based course is the culmination of the curriculum capstone experience for the
Computer Engineering Technology program. This course will be focused around a project
that includes: product ideation, project/resource management techniques and best practices;
system level specification, modeling, partition and design; team collaboration and communication; best documentation practices; industry level coding practices; hardware and software
co-design methodologies; design reuse and intellectual property creation; design verification
and validation; and design sign-off. Students, upon successful completion of the course, will
have an industry-like embedded system product design experience, starting by developing
the vision for a product, including the voice of the customer, and progress through the phases
to develop a complete product prototype with professional documentation. In addition the
students will: track and present their progress; participate in design and code reviews; demonstrate their product and highlight product differentiation. At the end of the course students
will give a formal presentation, product demonstration, deliver professional documentation,
go over lessons learned and suggest future improvements. (Prerequisites: CPET-561 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)

CPET-342 
Hardware Descrip Language Lab
Laboratory work to complement the lecture material covered in Hardware Description
Language. The laboratories are designed to illustrate concepts, reinforce analysis and design
skills, and develop instrumentation techniques associated with the lecture topics. Students,
upon completion of this course, will have the necessary skills to analyze, design, and implement
advanced hardware descriptions of combinational and sequential logic circuits using design
and verification best practices and methodologies. (Co-requisites: CPET-341 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)

Electrical Engineering Technology

CPET-461 
Real Time Operating Systems
This course will provide students with an introduction to operating systems theory, and practical problem solving approaches to real-time systems. An embedded real-time operating system
is used as the foundation for a variety of programming projects. Students, upon successful
completion of this course, will be able to understand the operation and describe the various
components of an operating system. They will be able to evaluate design trade-offs and selection
criteria for different types of operating systems, and demonstrate the ability to write multiple
process that run together within an embedded, real-time operating system. (Prerequisites:
((CPET-201 and CPET-202) or 0618-303) and CPET-321 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab
4, Credits 3 (Spring)

EEET-122 
AC Circuits Lab
Develops skills and practice in the design, fabrication, measurement and analysis of practical
AC circuits used in electrical systems. Topics include network theorems, reactance and impedance, AC power and power factor, resonance, maximum power transfer, frequency response,
and bandwidth. (Co-requisites: EEET-121 and (MATH-171 or MATH-181 or MATH-181A)
or equivalent courses.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)

CPET-481 
Networking Technologies
This course provides a practical study of voice & data communications from the point of the
OSI seven-layer and the TCP/IP five-layer protocol model. Both traditional circuit switched
telecommunications as well as IP based communications are studied. This course covers the
operation of the lower four layers in detail by examining some of the foundation laws of physics
including Nyquist and Shannon as well as selected protocols. Emphasis is placed on data internetworking, local-area networking and wide-area networking. This course is a problem based
course in that students apply the learning to various computer and networking mathematical
problems and are assessed on their ability to solve the problem. (Prerequisites: (MATH-171 or
MATH-181) and STAT-145 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CPET-499 
CPET Co-op
One semester or summer block of appropriate work experience in a related industry. Students
are required to complete a poster and presentation and participate in the ECTET Co-op presentation evening at the completion of each co-op experience. (Prerequisites: EEET-299, CPET-201,
CPET-202 and CPET- 321 or equivalent courses.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

EEET-121 
AC Circuits
Develops the skills to analyze and design practical AC circuits used in electrical systems. Topics
include network theorems, reactance and impedance, AC power and power factor, resonance,
maximum power transfer, frequency response, and bandwidth. (Prerequisites: C or better in
(EEET-111 & EEET-112) or 0609-215 or equivalent courses. Co-requisites: EEET-122 and
MATH-171 or MATH-181 or MATH-181A.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

EEET-211 
Electronics I
Develops the knowledge and ability to design active electronic circuits using diodes, bipolar
and field effect transistors. Emphasis is placed on device characteristics and specifications,
biasing circuits and transistor modeling. Applications of class A, B and D amplifiers including
frequency response and thermal analysis are studied. (Prerequisites: (EEET-121 and EEET-122)
or 0609-216 or equivalent courses. Co-requisites: EEET-212 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
EEET-212 
Electronics I Lab
Provides experience in the design, prototyping, measurement and analysis of diodes and transistors circuits. Emphasis is placed on understanding device characteristics and specifications,
while building and troubleshooting biasing circuits and transistor modeling. Applications of
class A, B and D amplifiers including frequency response and thermal analysis. (Co-requisites:
EEET-211 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1
EEET-216 
Circuits and Electronics Laboratory
Students, upon completion of this course, will be able to use laboratory tools to analyze and
troubleshoot DC and basic electronic circuits. They will be able to operate a power supply, multimeter, function generator and oscilloscope (Co-requisites: EEET-215 or equivalent course.
EEET-215 Coreq) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
EEET-221 
Electronics II
Develops the knowledge and ability to design active electronic circuits, such as audio amplifiers,
using op-amps. The operational amplifier and its applications are covered in detail. Applications
include: math operations like integration and differentiation, comparator circuits and signal
conditioning. The effects of op-amp limitations, both DC and AC, are studied. (Prerequisites:
(EEET-211 and EEET-212) or 0609-361 or equivalent courses with grades of C or better .
Co-Requisites: EEET-222 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

5

College of Applied Science and Technology

EEET-222 
Electronics II Lab
Provides experience in the design, prototyping, measurement and analysis of op-amp circuits. Circuits include: microphone pre-amps, integration and differentiation, comparator
circuits and signal conditioning. (Co-requisites: EEET-221 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits
1 (Spring)
EEET-225 
Electronic Amplifiers
Develop the skills to analyze and design electronic circuits. Topics include: semiconductor
theory, diodes, transistors and multiple operational amplifier applications including: current
sources, strain gauge amplifiers, differential amplifiers and comparator circuits. (Prerequisites:
EEET-121 or 0609-411 or equivalent course. Co-Requisites: EEET-226 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
EEET-226 
Electronic Amplifiers Laboratory
Students, upon completion of this course, will be able to use laboratory tools to analyze and
troubleshoot electronic circuits. They will be able to operate a power supply, multi-meter, function generator and oscilloscope. (EEET-225 Coreq) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
EEET-241 
Electrical Machines and Transformers
Develops the knowledge and ability to analyze and specify motors, generators, and transformers for use in systems such as wind turbines and electric vehicles. Topics include efficiency,
energy conservation, power factor, magnetism, electro-magnetic force, fields, armatures, commutators, rotors, stators, brushes, starters, controllers, DC machines, AC motors, alternators,
single phase and three phase dynamos, three phase circuits, phasors, transformer properties, isolation, efficiency, and voltage regulation. (Prerequisites: (EEET-121 and EEET-122)
or 0609-216 or equivalent courses. Co-Requisites: EEET-242 or equivalent course.) Lecture
2, Credits 2 (Spring)
EEET-242 
Electrical Machines and Transformers Lab
Provides experience with motors, generators and transformers. Topics include power factor,
magnetism, electro-magnetic force, fields, armatures, commutators, rotors, stators, brushes,
starters, controllers, DC machines, AC motors, alternators, single phase and three phase dynamos, three phase circuits, phasors, transformer properties, isolation, efficiency, and voltage
regulation. (Co-requisites: EEET-241 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
EEET-247 
Microprocessors and Digital Systems
Applications of a contemporary microcontroller will be used to teach Engineering Technology
students digital logic, assembly programming and microprocessor interfacing. This course is
intended as a service course for non-electrical majors who have not taken digital fundamentals
course. (Prerequisites: MATH-111 or MATH-171 or MATH-181 or MATH-181A or equivalent
course.Co-requisites: EEET-248 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
EEET-248 
Microprocessors and Digital Systems Laboratory
Laboratory applications teaching microcontroller fundamentals. Topics include digital logic, assembly programming and microprocessor interfacing. The laboratories for this course
combine real hardware with an assembler and terminal emulator. (Co-requisites: EEET-247
or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Spring)
EEET-251 
Clean Energy Power Systems
An alternative energy course that will cover all types of available sources such as hydroelectric power, wind energy, combustion turbines, active and passive solar, photovoltaic systems,
fuel cells, combined heat and power systems, biomass, geothermal, ocean and nuclear energy.
Power electronic components (inverters and converters) and components necessary for connection to the electrical power grid will be discussed. Alternative energy storage systems will
be analyzed. Also, economics, global warming, government regulations and tax initiatives for
clean energy products will be discussed. (Prerequisites: (PHYS-111 or 1017-211) or (PHYS211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 1017-389) or equivalent course.Co-requisites:
EEET-252 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
EEET-252 
Clean Energy Power Systems Laboratory
Laboratory work to complement the lecture material covered in Clean Energy Power Systems.
Experiments in photovoltaic cells, wind turbines and fuel cells will be investigated. Electrolysis
will be used to generate hydrogen required in the fuel cell experiment. Connection to the
“grid” is demonstrated using a 3-phase synchronous generator and disconnect switchgear.
(Co-requisites: EEET-251 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall)

6	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

EEET-261 
Fundamentals of Audio Engineering
This course provides a fundamental study of the technology and practice used in recording,
editing, mixing, production, and distribution of sound. Topics include microphone types,
selection and application; the mixing console, mixing techniques and introduction to Signal
Processing equipment and associated techniques, an introduction to the concepts relating to
digital audio technology such as sampling, the Nyquist theorem, alias frequencies, quantization,
dynamic range, compression and their applications will be covered. Topics include basics of
digital audio, session creation, importing media, introduction to MIDI, recording techniques,
editing, mixing, and mastering. (Prerequisites: MATH-101 or MATH-111 or MATH-171 or
MATH-181 or MATH-181A equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEET-299 
EET Career Orientation
This course is an introduction to the professional engineering careers, cooperative educational
placement process at RIT, the programs in the department and RIT resources. Topics include
engineering technology vs. engineering, review of resources available at RIT, the co-operative
education placement process, working in a diverse workforce, and engineering ethics including the IEEE Code of Ethics. The ethical expectations of employers for co-op students and RIT
during a job search. (This class is restricted to students with at least 3rd year student standing
in EEET-BS or CPET-BS.) Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)
EEET-311 
Communications Electronics
Develops the knowledge and ability to design communication electronics, such as AM/FM
radios using transistors and integrated circuits. This course applies the concepts of circuits
and electronics to basic analog communication circuits for amplitude and frequency modulation. Topics studied are RF Amplifiers, Fourier Analysis, AM and FM transmission and
reception, phase-locked loops, synthesizers, oscillators, DSB and SSB communication systems,
antennas and EM wave propagation. (Prerequisites: (EEET-221 and EEET-222) or 0609-362 or
equivalent courses with grades of C or better . Co-Requisites: EEET-312 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
EEET-312 
Communications Electronics Lab
Provides experience in the practice and application of the concepts of circuits and electronics
to basic analog communication circuits for amplitude and frequency modulation in a laboratory environment. Construction and measurement are emphasized. Topics studied are RF
amplifiers, Fourier analysis, construction of an AM and/or FM receiver,oscillators, filters,
and circuit simulation. (Co-requisites EEET-311 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
EEET-321 
Signals, Systems and Transforms
Develops the analytical skills to design, develop and simulate analog and digital filters, control
systems and advanced electronic circuits such as those used in robotics, digital communications and wireless systems. Continuous-time and discrete-time linear, time-invariant, casual
systems are examined throughout the course. Topics include: Fourier series, the Laplace transform, signal sampling and the z-transform. Advanced circuit analysis techniques include circuit
characterization in the s-plane. MATLAB is introduced and used extensively; PSPICE is utilized
for circuit simulation. (Two hour recitation period, scheduled after the weekly classroom meetings (EEET Multiple Course Prereq) Lecture 3, Recitation 2, Credits 4 (Fall)
EEET-351 
Solar Photovoltaic Applications
This course addresses the practical application of solar cells to producing electricity for commercial, residential, utility-scale, and electric vehicle charger installations. The course begins
with an introduction to the characteristics of the sun as an energy source. Next, the construction of solar cells and their performance characteristics are discussed. System design for
battery backup and grid connected systems is then explored. Options for integration of PV
systems within the building architecture are discussed and the influence of codes and standards on system design and system cost are examined. (Prerequisites: (PHYS-111 or 1017-211)
or (PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 1017-389) or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: EEET-352 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
EEET-352 
Solar Photovoltaic Applications Lab
An integrated set of laboratory exercises provides hands-on operational experience with photovoltaic cells and systems and reinforces key concepts from the accompanying solar photovoltaic
applications course. (Co-requisites: EEET-351 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Spring)
EEET-353 
Fuel Cell Systems
An introduction to fuel cell technology and fuel cell systems, covering theory, operation, and
application. Begins with the fundamental principles of fuel cells, developing the key equations governing performance and establishes a framework for evaluating environmental and
economic benefits of fuel cell systems. High and low temperature fuel cells are covered including Polymer-Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) hydrogen, methanol, phosphoric acid and solid
oxide fuel cells. Integration of fuel cells with electric power and building thermal systems is
examined. An integrated set of laboratory exercises provides hands-on operational experience with fuel cells and reinforces key concepts from the course. (Prerequisites: (PHYS-111
or 1017-211) or (PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 1017-389) or equivalent course.Co-requisites: EEET-354 or equivalent course.PHYS & EEET-354 Coreq) Lecture
3, Credits 2 (Spring)

College of Applied Science and Technology

EEET-354 
Fuel Cell Systems Lab
An integrated set of laboratory exercises provides hands-on operational experience with fuel
cells and reinforces key concepts from the co-requisite course (Co-requisites: EEET-353 or
equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Spring)
EEET-361 
Modern Audio Production
Sound, voice, music, and effects play a critical role in telephone communication systems and
in entertainment systems. Development of integrated multi-channel acoustic information is
a complex process. This course Provides an intermediate level study of the technology used
in recording, editing, mixing and mastering audio. Students are introduced to core concepts
and skills necessary to operate a system running large sessions with up to 48 tracks. Students
will develop an appreciation of, and the requisite skills to create, organize, mix, filter, process,
enhance and coordinate sound information in digital format. Topics include MIDI, virtual
instruments, filtering, processing for sound enhancement, editing and adjusting time bases,
mixing and mastering, and audio production. Students will develop critical listening skills
as well as technical skills. (Prerequisites: EEET-261 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)
EEET-421 
Design and Innovation
This class develops skills and habits that support successful innovation and design in the workplace. A set of intense project-based learning experiences is used to drive inquiry discourse
and constructive learning. Your skills in prototyping, project management and creativity will
be improved as you participate in engineering discourse including prototype reviews, classroom discussion, reading and journal writing. The philosophy and practice of prototyping will
be emphasized through exercises including creating 3-D printed parts and smartphone app.
The methodology of design thinking is introduced as a framework to explore contemporary
innovation as a process. (Prerequisites: ((EEET-221 and EEET-222) or 0609-362) and ((CPET201 and CPET-202) or 0618-303) or equivalent courses.Co-requisite: EEET-422 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
EEET-422 
Design and Innovation Lab
(Co-requisites: EEET-421 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Summer)
EEET-425 
Digital Signal Processing
Develops the knowledge and ability to process signals using Digital Signal Processing (DSP)
techniques. Starts with foundational concepts in sampling, probability, statistics, noise, fixed
and floating point number systems and describes how they affect real world performance of
DSP systems. Fundamental principles of convolution, linearity, duality, impulse responses,
and discrete fourier transforms are used to develop FIR and IIR digital filters and to explain
DSP techniques such as windowing. Students get an integrated lab experience writing DSP
code that executes in real-time on DSP hardware. (Prerequisites: EEET-321 or (0609-333 and
0609-403) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 4 (Spring)
EEET-427 
Control Systems
Develops the knowledge of control system concepts and applies them to electronic, optical and
mechanical systems. Systems are characterized and modeled using linear systems methods,
focused with a controls perspective. Impulse responses, step responses, and transfer functions
are reviewed. Principles of stability and damping are developed and applied to the specification and design of open and closed loop compensators used to deliver specified input-output
performance. Students get an integrated lab experience designing compensators in the analog domain for electronic and electro-optic systems, and in the analog and digital domains for
electromechanical systems (Prerequisites: EEET-321 or (0609-333 and 0609-403) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 4 (Spring)
EEET-431 
Transmission Lines
Develops the knowledge and ability to analyze and design high frequency signal transmission
media as applied to digital and RF systems. Topics include the propagation of electromagnetic waves on wire media; transmission line voltage, current, loss and impedance; graphical
methods for analysis; transmission lines as circuit elements, application of the general transmission line equation as derived from the LC distributed model. (Pre-requisites: EEET-321
or (0609-333 and 0609-403) or equivalent courses. Co-Requisites: EEET-432 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
EEET-432 
Transmission Lines Lab
Provides experience in measurement and data interpretation related to propagation of signals on transmission lines and examines the use of transmission lines as circuit elements.
(Co-requisites: EEET-431 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)

EEET-461 
Introduction to Acoustics
This course introduces the student to sound as both a physical and psychological phenomenon.
The course explains the nature of sound in terms of acoustic pressure and provides an overview
of how humans receive and perceive sound. Sound waves are also introduced, starting with the
development of the acoustic wave equation and its solution for plane and spherical waves with
harmonic sources. The concepts of acoustic intensity and acoustic impedance are presented.
The course also includes study of basic sound sources as well as the absorption, reflection, scattering and diffraction of sound by various physical structures. (Prerequisites: (MATH-172 or
MATH-182) and ((PHYS-111 or 1017-211) or (PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017312T or 1017-389) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
EEET-499 
Electrical Engineering Technology Co-op
One semester or summer block of appropriate work experience in a related industry. Students
are required to complete a poster and presentation and participate in the ECTET Co-op presentation evening at the completion of each co-op experience. (Prerequisites: (CPET-201 and
CPET-202) or EEET-311 and EEET-299 or equivalent course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
EEET-525 
Wireless RF Systems
Develops the knowledge and ability to apply representative regulatory requirements for wireless
mobile and fixed radio frequency communication systems. Topics include: the radio frequency
mobile wireless environment, the common wireless systems, and regulatory aspects related to
deployment of the wireless infrastructure. (Prerequisites: (EEET-311 and EEET-312) or 0609363 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEET-531 
Fiber Optic Technology
This course presents the basic technologies of fiber-optic telecommunications systems including optical fiber, light sources and modulators, photodetectors and receivers, and passive
components such as optical mux/demux and couplers. Studens will learn the principle of
operation of these technologies as well as gain practical hands-on experience in the labaratory. Students will also learn how to design and assess a fiber-optic link impaired by attenuation
and dispersion. (Prerequisites: EEET-321 or (0609-333 and 0609-403) or equivalent courses.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEET-541 
Power Systems II
Load flow and economic operation of power systems are studied. The symmetrical component
method of three-phase circuits is used for electrical fault analysis. Power system relay protection, supervisory control, power quality and system stability are discussed. (Prerequisites:
EEET-441 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEET-561 
Audio Power Amplifiers
Develops knowledge of audio power amplifier design and audio signal measurement methods. Covers digital and analog amplifiers from high power (concert halls) to low power (cell
phones and handheld digital media devices). Topics include digital sound synthesis using class
D switching amplifiers, analog amplifiers, distortion, noise, stability, filtering, heatsinking, efficiency, and low power modes. (Prerequisites: EEET-221 or equivalent course.Co-requisites:
EEET-425 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEET-598 
Special Topics
Special Topics is an experimental upper-division course intended as a means for offering
innovative topics not currently reflected in either the Computer or Electrical Engineering
Technology curriculums. (Prerequisites: 4th year student standing in CPET or EEET and completion of at least 1 co-op block.) Lecture 3, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

Electrical/Mechanical Engineering Technology
EMET-419 
Experimental Methods for EMET
This is a course in development of experiments, laboratory techniques and the preparation of
laboratory reports. Experiments utilize principles of statics, strength of materials, dynamics,
electronics and instrumentation. Students work independently and in groups to prepare formal and informal reports and an oral presentation. (Prerequisites: EMET-290 and STAT-145
or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EMET-499 
EMET Co-op
EMET Co-op (Prerequisites: ENGT-299 or equivalent course.) Co-op, Credits 0

EEET-441 
Power Systems I
Basic elements of a power system, energy sources, substation configuration, load cycles,
balanced and unbalanced three-phase circuits, power factor correction, transmission line configurations and impedance, transformers and the per unit system are studied. Load flow and
economic operation are introduced. (Prerequisities: (EEET-215 and EEET-216 (or 0609-411))
or (EEET-241 and EEET-242 (or 0609-337)) or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

7

College of Applied Science and Technology

Engineering Technology
ENGT-110 
Undeclared Engineering Technology Seminar
This seminar course is designed to introduce students to the technical disciplines in the School
of Engineering Technology. Students will learn about the various programs through informational sessions led by faculty from the various programs, tours, presentations by current
students and alumni, and assignments developed to assist the students with exploring the different career options. Assignments will be completed both individually and in small teams.
Students will be required to demonstrate oral andwritten communication skills. Lecture/Lab
2, Credits 1 (Fall)
ENGT-299 
Career Seminar
This course is an introduction to the cooperative educational placement process at RIT, the
programs in the department and RIT resources. Topics include engineering technology vs.
engineering, review of resources available at RIT, the co-operative education placement process, and the ethical expectations of employers for co-op students and RIT during a job search.
(This class is restricted to 2nd year students in MCET-BS, EMET-BS, ESHS-BS, CVET-BS or
MFET-BS.) Lecture 1, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Environmental Sustainability, Health and Safety
ESHS-100 
Environmental Sustainability, Health and Safety Seminar
This course will present the key concepts of environmental sustainability, health and safety
through experiential learning and the perspective of professional practitioners. Through a
series of field trips, presentations, and discussions, students will learn how EHS professionals
function in the work environment. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-150 
Principles of Environmental Sustainability, Health and Safety
This course presents an overview of the principles of environmental sustainability, health
and safety that allows students to think critically about current environmental sustainability, health and safety issues. (This course is restricted to students in the ESHS-BS program.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-200 
Environmental Geology
An introduction to geology from an environmental geology perspective, including topics related
to sustainability of geologic resources. Basic geology topics include earth materials and internal
forces. Environmental topics include erosion, mass wasting, river systems, and environmental sampling. Sustainability of earth resources is explored, including strategic and industrial
minerals, and the long-term viability of fossil fuels. (Prerequisites: Enrollment in this class is
restricted to students in ESHS-BS or ENVS-BS only. Co-requisites: ESHS-201 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-201 
Environmental Monitoring and Measurement I
This laboratory course provides students with skills used in geologic investigations and investigations of contaminated sites. Students will learn to describe and analyze surficial and
shallow subsurface geological features, and to plan, execute, and interpret sampling events.
(Prerequisites: CHMG-111 or equivalent course. Co-requisites: ESHS-200 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 2 (Fall)
ESHS-225 
Construction Safety
This course is designed to cover construction health and safety hazards and will study OSHA
regulations in depth. Students get to handle and investigate construction safety issues, The
OSHA standards addressing trench excavation, scaffolding, temporary electric circuits, fall
protection, HAZCOM, underground construction are studied. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-250 
Introduction to Hydrology
This course will cover most subdisciplines within the broad field of hydrology. Students
will learn the theoretical background, and practical applications of selected aspects of the
science including the hydrologic cycle, surface water calculations, vadose zone flow, groundwater hydraulics, groundwater monitoring, water chemistry and ground- water contaminant
transport. The class culminates in an investigation of a mock contaminated site in which the
students apply aspects of all of the above mentioned topics. Hydrology has important applications for environmental managers, and these applications will be highlighted in the class.
(Prerequisites: (PHYS-111 or PHYS- 211 or PHYS-211A) and ESHS-200 or equivalent courses.
Co-requisites: ESHS-251 or equivalent course.Prerequisites: PHYS 111 or 1017-211 or PHYS211, or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 10179-389 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

ESHS-251 
Environmental Monitoring and Measurement II
This laboratory course provides students with skills used in hydrologic investigations and
investigations of contaminated sites. Students will learn field skills to support surface water
investigations, groundwater investigations, and investigations of contaminated sites. Students
will also learn to specify sampling any chemical analysis for contaminated sites, and to use common air and water quality field analytical instruments. (Prerequisites: ESHS-201 or equivalent
course.Co-requisites: ESHS-250 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Recitation 1, Credits 2 (Spring)
ESHS-310 
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management
An examination of strategies and technologies to move an organization toward environmental
sustainability, including: resource use reduction, material substitution, process and product modification, and waste minimization; and for handling and managing wastes including:
treatment, storage, transport and disposal storing solid and hazardous waste. Associated
environmental impacts, regulatory concerns, technical feasibility and costs are considered.
(Prerequisites: ESHS-150 and CHMG-111 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-330 
Industrial Wastewater Management
This course investigates characteristics and sources of industrial wastewaters, related environmental impacts, regulatory implications, and technical considerations of current treatment
and disposal methodologies. Students learn to identify appropriate methods, technologies and
sequences for source reduction, treatment and pretreatment, direct discharge and management of treatment residuals. (Prerequisites: ESHS-150 and CHMG-111 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-460 
EHS Accident Causation and Prevention
Historical as well as modern accident and incident causation models and theories will be covered. Students will learn how to identify and prevent unsafe acts and conditions that can lead
to accidents and incidents. The application of management system controls, including operational controls to prevent accidents and incidents will be reviewed. In addition, students will
learn how to investigate accidents and incidents. They will also learn how to develop accident
and incident investigation written programs. (Prerequisites: ESHS-320 or equivalent course
and at least 4th year standing in the ESHS-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-480 
EHS Law
An overview of environmental, health and safety (EHS) related law with an emphasis on legislative law. Topics include a review of the historical and modern sources for EHS law, the
emergence of administrative law and the responsibilities of the separate branches of government. Major EHS related legislation will be covered. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 4th year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-489 
Special Topics Lecture, Credits 1 - 4

Special Topics

ESHS-499 
ESHS Co-op
ESHS Co-op (Prerequisites: ENGT-299 or equivalent course.) Co-op, Credits 0
ESHS-500 
Social Responsibility and Environmental Sustainability
This course will introduce social responsibility concepts and approaches presented in key documents like the ISO 26000 Social Responsibility Standard and the Universal Bill of Human Rights,
and will explore the web of relationships in which an organization or a community exists, with
the objective of providing the foundational knowledge necessary to plan a strategy for closing
the gap between the activities, products and services of the organization or community and
the eco-system within which it exists. (Restricted to students with at least 4th year standing in
the ESHS-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-501 
Fire Protection
Introduces fundamental concepts in protection of industrial workers and property from fire
and explosion. Fire chemistry, control of ignition sources in industry, and properties of combustible materials are discussed. Fire detection and extinguishment are covered along with
building construction for fire prevention, life safety, fire codes and related topics. (Prerequisites:
ESHS-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-511 
Occupational Health
This course will provide students with the the fundamentals of industrial hygiene and public
health. Emphasis will be on the toxicological effects of various chemical, biological and physical insults on the body, monitoring and personal sampling for these substances as well as
and personal protection and controls against such substances will be covered. (Prerequisites:
ESHS-150 and CHMG-111 and (BIOL-102 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203)) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ESHS-512 
Occupational Health Lab
Hands-on practical hazardous material response. Students who complete the course will receive
OSHA HAZWOPER 40 hour certification. (Co-requisite: ESHS-511 or equivalent course.) Lab,
Credits 1 (Fall)

8	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Applied Science and Technology

ESHS-515 
Corporate EHS Management
Presents the fundamentals of how companies manage their environmental, health and safety
(EHS) issues. EHS motivations and strategies for corporate ESHS management will be explored.
Organizational considerations for managing corporate EHS programs will be identified. Total
quality management and its applications to corporate EHS problem solving will be introduced.
The basic elements of EHS management systems will be reviewed. EHS training and corporate
EHS reporting will also be examined. (Prerequisites: ESHS-460 and ESHS-480 or equivalent
courses and 5th year standing in the ESHS-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ESHS-525 
Air Emissions Management
This course will present an overview of industrial air pollution management; its sources, methods of reduction, control and management. Students will become familiar with the history of
air pollution, the chemistry and effects of pollutants, regulations and standards, and control
technologies; as well as developing analytical and quantitative skills necessary in air emissions management decision-making. (Prerequisites: ESHS-150 and CHMG-111 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-526 
Exposure Assessment and Analysis
The course focuses on industrial hygiene applications and hands on participation. Particular
attention will be given to sampling strategies- from similar exposure grouping, actual sampling
experiences with a wide range of industrial hygiene instruments, and sampling analysis using
statistical protocols. Field experience with instrumentation, as well as professional written
and oral communication of results is emphasized. There are several out of classroom learning
experiences required (team based). (Prerequisites: ESHS-340 or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ESHS-530 
Mechanical and Electrical Safeguarding
Discussion of machine safety with emphasis on hazard analysis, risk estimation, safeguarding
techniques, and electrical safety. Particular attention will be paid to applicable OSHA, ANSI,
NFPA, and EN standards as they relate to wood, metal, films and automation. Elements of
the course will change regularly to reflect emerging issues in industry. Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
ESHS-544 
Remedial Investigation and Corrective Action
Describes the sequence of events required to investigate, conduct feasibility studies and identify
appropriate corrective actions at hazardous waste sites. Explains the process flow logistics, concepts and rationale behind each action. Explores current issues of how clean is clean? Students
learn to develop conceptual site characterization plans; effective RI/CA proposals; review and
evaluate work plans, procedures and operations plans, and contingency plans (Prerequisites:
ESHS-310 and ESHS-330 and ESHS-350 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-550 
Project Management
This course has been designed to give the student an overview of the fundamental concepts of
modern project management. Areas of focus include the project life cycle (PLC), the project
management body of knowledge (PMBOK), program evaluation review technique (PERT), critical path method (CPM) and various budgeting and resource allocation techniques. Discussion
of project management organizations, negotiation and conflict resolution and project termination will be included, along with an introduction to Project Management Institute (PMI)
and Microsoft Project for Windows. (This course is restricted to students in the ESHS-BS program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ESHS-590 
Capstone Project
This is a faculty-designed capstone team project course for ESHS seniors. It presents students
with one or more identified EHS need(s) and challenges them to work together to plan, schedule and carry out a project to design and develop socially responsible and environmentally
sustainable solutions. The project may vary from offering to offering reflecting current trends
and developments. (Prerequisites: ESHS-500 or equivalent course and 5th year standing in the
ESHS-BS program.) Project, Credits 3 (Spring)

Hospitality Tourism Management-Food Management
FOOD-121 
Principles of Food Production
Introduction to the basic principles involved in the preparation of high quality food. Topics
include product identification, market forms, varieties, availability, composition, standards of
quality, preparation techniques, and function of foods and ingredients. Standard methods of
preparation will be introduced. Professionalism in appearance and work habits, self-organization, management, teamwork, and techniques for efficient food production are stressed.***Fee:
Lab fee associated with this course** (This course is restricted to HSPS-BS and HSPS-AAS
Major students.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

FOOD-123 
Sanitation and Safety
A discussion of current problems confronting the industry as a result of the most recent legislative developments as they relate to food safety and health around the globe. Material will
focus on current regulations as per the latest Food Codes. Topics include Hazard Analysis
Critical Control Point (HACCP) procedures, kitchen safety, and facility sanitation. Students
will take the National Restaurant Association ServSafe Examination upon completion of the
course and receive a ServSafe certificate if they score 75 or better. Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Spring)
FOOD-151 
International Food Distribution
The course will focus on the economic geography of food production and the associated
economics of physical distribution and market structure. Special emphasis will be placed
on examining the impact multinational food companies have on international distribution
channels. The sourcing, purchasing and synergy strategies of multinational companies will
be considered in conjunction with the economic principles supporting strategy formulation.
Special emphasis will be placed on the role of commodities, food processing, packaging, and
retail operation in the value-added chain. Seminar, Credits 3 (Fall)
FOOD-153 
Foods of the World
This course is an introduction to the foods of many regions of the world. Indigenous ingredients and geographical influences on the development of each regional cuisine are included.
Food customs and special food preparation techniques of the various cultures are addressed.
.***Fee: Lab fee associated with this course** Lecture/Lab, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-160 
Beers of the World
An introduction to Beers: History, the brewing process, distribution systems, production, flavor characteristics, partnering with foods, handling and serving techniques. Beers produced
from the major beer brewing centers of the world will be tasted and compared with similar
brews form different countries. The way alcohol is processed in the human body is considered
as well as the economic impact of brewing and distributing beer will be explored. .***Fee: Lab
fee associated with this course** Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-161 
Wines of the World I
This course is an introduction to global wine history, vineyard methods, production techniques,
grape characteristics, sensory evaluation, marketing and distribution..***Fee: Lab fee associated with this course** Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-162 
Wines of the World II
This course builds on what was learned in Wines of the World I. More in depth exploration of
global wine history, vineyard methods, production techniques, grape characteristics, sensory
evaluation, marketing and distribution. Like its sister courses, Beers of the World, Foods of the
World and Wine and Food Pairing, there are weekly tastings and recommendations on pairings.
This provides practical applications for daily use in personal and business situations. .***Fee:
Lab fee associated with this course** Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-163 
Wine Connoisseur
The majority of Wine Connoisseur classes will have guest speakers from the wine industry.
Through class and lab work involving tastings, topics covered will include: The technical aspects
of viticulture and viniculture, the Three Tier System, health considerations, tourism, global
regulations, wine competitions, cellaring and service, food pairing, public relations, marketing, social media, and trends. This provides practical applications for daily use in personal and
business situations as well as co-op and job opportunities. .***Fee: Lab fee associated with this
course** (Prerequisites: FOOD-161 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
FOOD-165 
Wine and Food Pairing I
This course is an introduction of pairing food with wine and other beverages. Students will
experience "What grows together, goes together," and discover how regional wines and food
pairings have a natural affinity for one another. Students will design their own menu and keep
a tasting journal. This course experience includes sampling of food and wine, cooking demonstrations, and guest speakers. .***Fee: Lab fee associated with this course** Lecture/Lab 2,
Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-171 
Introduction to Viticulture and Viniculture
An in-depth, hands-on exploration of vineyard practices, grape growing and winemaking
techniques. This course focuses on the cool-climate, Finger Lakes wine region and includes
several visits to local vineyards, wineries and businesses for hands-on experiences. Possible
participation in aspects of harvest, processing of fruit and winemaking processes while learning from industry leaders. Speakers will illuminate how decisions are made involving start-up,
finances, the science involved in production, marketing and more in their various industries.
There will be tastings of grapes, unfinished and finished wines. A group winemaking project
allows further exploration. Lab fee required. (Prerequisites: FOOD-161 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

9

College of Applied Science and Technology

FOOD-173 
Beverage Fermentation and Distillation
Exploration of traditional and emerging trends in fermentation and distillation of beverages.
In addition to in-class lectures, group and individual presentations, this course will include
visits to local businesses for hands-on experiences involving beer, wine and spirits. Speakers
will illuminate how decisions are made involving start-up, finances, the science involved in
production, marketing and more in their various industries. There will be tastings of wines,
beers and spirits. An individual innovative project allows in-depth exploration of wine, beers
and spirits in or outside their own field of interest. This provides practical applications for daily
use in personal and business situations. Lab fee required. Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FOOD-175 
Marketing Wine, Beer and Spirits
This course will focus on understanding how to develop a marketing strategy and plan to bring
products to market. The specific focus will be on marketing wine, beer and spirits. In addition to understanding how to build a marketing plan, this class will also analyze the trends
within wine, beer, and spirits. There are field trips, guest speakers and tastings of wine, beer
and spirits throughout the course. This provides practical applications for daily use in personal and business situations as well as co-op and job opportunities. Lab fee required. Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FOOD-223 
Food and Beverage Management
An introductory course covering the basic principles involved in the management of food and
beverage operations. Topics include food and beverage marketing, menu planning, nutrition
principles, staffing, food cost, production and preparation procedures, service and design. Both
commercial and non-commercial food operations will be discussed. (HSPS-AAS/BS, NUTRBSAAS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FOOD-251 
Commodity Market Analysis
Commodity Market Analysis is dedicated to developing a thorough understanding of commodity groups, their supply and demand characteristics, associated import/export policies
and the contractual environment. Students will be introduced to the sources of commodity
information and trading systems and the economic function of commodities. Various commodities and world events influencing them will be followed throughout the semester. Lecture,
Credits 1 (Fall)
FOOD-325 
Food Innovation and Development
Students will explore their creativity through instructor- and student-planned food experiments
involving sensory and objective evaluation of food quality, recipe development, problem-solving, experimental design, and written and oral communication of research. Individual research
projects focus on assessing new ingredients or technologies, creating new products, and/or
evaluating the marketability of a new product. .***Fee: Lab fee associated with this course**
(Prerequisites: FOOD-121 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-413 
Restaurant Management
This course is designed to develop entry-level competence in food system management.
Students will operate a restaurant with full beverage service. The student will play knowledge and skilled gained from previous course prerequisites as they rotate through managerial
positions. The student will be exposed to four major areas: The planning function, organizational function, leadership function, and control function. Computer (micros) utilization will
be integral part of the course. (Prerequisites: FOOD-226 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab
12, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
FOOD-454 
Food Processing, Quality, and Integrity
Traditional and contemporary processing methods will be introduced with emphasis on applications to food retail operations. The effect of these technologies on the storage life and sensory
qualities of the products will be examined along with common modes of loss of quality in
foods. Students will be introduced to industry-standard quality assurance measures. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
FOOD-489 
Special Topics Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 1 - 3

Special Topics

FOOD-599 
Independent Study
This course provides for independent study in approved subject areas that have specialized
value to students. Proposals for independent study must be approved by a supervising faculty
member prior to registration. This course may be taken more than once. Independent Study,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

10	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

Hospitality Management-Food Management
HSPT-131 
Hotel Management and Operations
This course introduces the student to the distinctive nature of the hospitality industry. Students
learn about the various venues of business in the hospitality industry with a main focus on a
300-room full-service hotel operation. Students analyze hotel case studies at the RIT Inn with
the interaction of RIT Inn management. The course blends classroom learning with applied
learning. Students focus on the business management of hotels by learning the specific terminology and language that relates to successful hotel management and leadership. (HSPS-BS,
HSPS-AAS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-181 
Principles of Food, Hotel, and Tourism Operations
This course introduces the student to the terms and concepts associated with the food, hotel,
and tourism industries. The following distinctive operations will be explored; resorts, restaurants, catering, institutional food service, transportation, attractions, and events. The
fundamental service philosophy behind the service sector will be introduced. (HSPS-AAS/BS,
NUTR-BSAAS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-212 
Franchising in the Service Sector
Franchising has been a successful method for business expansion. This course covers the
advantages and disadvantages of franchising as well as the factors in obtaining, developing,
and operating a franchise operation that meets specific customer needs. Legal and financing issues are also covered. Major project developing a franchise plan is required. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
HSPT-232 
Hospitality Real Estate and Facilities Management
Students will learn the criteria that owners and developers follow in developing hotel concepts
and locating them in key markets where they will succeed. Students will also learn the steps in
site selection, working with the trades in the construction phase, and turning the operation over
to management. At the operation phase an engineering and maintenance department will be
created to keep the property running efficiently and effectively for guest and employee safety
and for cost efficiency. Special topics covering replacement and renovation will be addressed.
The management incentives for creativity and innovation in technology and best practices will
be a concurrent theme (Prerequisites: HSPT-131 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-235 
International Destinations
This course introduces the student to the most famous travel destinations outside the United
States. Specific emphasis is placed on understanding the cultural and political differences present at these locations and what makes them unique. Students explore the role governments
and the media play in generating destination appeal. How international destinations are growing and declining as it relates to the industries of hospitality and tourism are explored, with
emphasis on working abroad. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-244 
Meeting and Event Management
As companies and associations continue to grow they find their members are an increasingly
diverse group from many geographic areas. While texting and email are ways to keep informed,
the need to meet and discuss, in real time, what needs to be done has actually increased.
Meetings today help us celebrate meaningful events, change the way people behave, motivate
employees to perform better and solve problems by bringing together ideas from many different cultures. The meeting and event planner of today must know how to plan, execute and
evaluate any event to show value to the stakeholders. This course shows the student how to go
about doing this, from writing a purpose and goals for the meeting to financial break downs
and gathering feedback, all while staging the event of a life time, over and over again! (HSPSBS, HSPS-AAS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HSPT-246 
Casino Management
This course is designed to give students an introduction to the casino environment. Students
will have a strong working knowledge of casino operations and the interrelationship of the casino with other major departments (lodging, food, beverage, entertainment, etc.). Topics include
casino marketing strategies, gaming regulations, economic impact issues, history of gaming in
America, design and layout of casinos, surveillance, back-office procedures, and gaming regulations. This course will teach casino games. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HSPT-281 
Service Management in a Global Economy
There are almost no businesses today that do not require some sort of service delivery package
for the consumer. This course focuses on how a business identifies, qualifies, and measures a
service as the main product of its operations. While a tangible product may also be involved,
this class focuses on the service component. As companies globalize the need to provide service at different levels is compounded by the need to consider alternate distribution systems.
This course follows service from it conceptual start, through its packaging, delivery and quality control systems. We also consider the implications of the experience economy. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Applied Science and Technology

HSPT-284 
Hospitality Industry Sales and Marketing
This course introduces the student to the application of marketing concepts in hotel, food and
beverage, and visitor industry operations. Included are hotels, restaurants, catering establishments, and clubs. This is accomplished by defining the marketing function, promotional
strategies, marketing plan organization, sales office work flow, customer contact methods, and
servicing procedures for attracting and exceeding customer needs in an increasingly competitive and changing economic environment. (Prerequisites: HSPT-181 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HSPT-336 
International Risk Assessment and Hospitality Law
This course introduces the student to contract, tort, bailment and agency law as they relate to
the hospitality industry and apply to international operations. It also explores the role of insurance and contracts in accepting, transferring or avoiding risk. The course covers the legal rights
and responsibilities of patrons and owners as they relate to public accommodations, providers
of transportation and livery and common law. The course focus is on civil rather than criminal
law. It enables students to develop a preventative attitude toward liability and assumption of
responsibilities. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-345 
Venue Management
This course provides students with an understanding of the unique management issues facing
the operation of the following entertainment venues: sports stadiums, performing arts centers,
race tracks, and conventions centers. Students will use local venues as case studies and conduct sites visits to sports team facilities, concert venues and the city convention center. Local
promoters will expose students to booking and legal process of attracting entertainment to a
venue. (HSPS-BS, HSPS-AAS) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-372 
Hospitality Entrepreneurship in the Global Economy
Entrepreneurship in hospitality and tourism is recognized as providing many benefits, including economic growth, job creation, and innovation, to regions and economies. This course will
provide an introduction and overview to entrepreneurship in the hospitality industry and the
creation of new enterprises at the national, firm and individual levels. Various models and case
studies from the world of hospitality will be employed to analyze opportunities and to provide
real world, global hospitality examples of relevant issues. Venture financing and entrepreneurial strategies for hospitality businesses will receive particular attention. Significant time will
be devoted to translating entrepreneurs’ (students’) visions and identified hospitality-related
opportunities into creating a business plan. This business plan will provide a blueprint for starting and running a new hospitality enterprise. The focus will be on developing a viable “real
world” hospitality venture with practical considerations that is supported by financial modeling and projections. (Prerequisites: ACCT-110 or NACC-205 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-374 
Hospitality Enterprise Management and Growth
Enterprises in hospitality and tourism pass through many stages as they grow from a startup to a mature organization. This course highlights what must be accomplished during each
stage to ensure that hospitality business development is continued and sustainable. The critical
point of the course is to give students an in-depth understanding of tools and skills necessary
to create and grow a successful new tourism or hospitality enterprise with potential to expand.
Students will actively discuss concepts and possible alternatives in operating hospitality- and
tourism-based enterprises Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HSPT-381 
Technology in Service Systems:
Predicting the future... Adapting to change... Connecting and communicating... Lifelong learning... A fundamental societal revolution is changing the nature of work and leisure. Explore
the emerging and future work worlds, consumer trends, and the technologies that are changing the way society works. Emphasis is on technologies impacting the food, hotel and travel
service industries. Technologies explored may include those associated with communication,
information retrieval, imaging, marketing, employee training, product quality, production
customization, customer service, security, health, entertainment, and customer interface, as
time permits. Student teams will chart the flow of product/service systems and identify innovative technologies to enhance the quality of service and creatively meet the needs of customers
and emerging trends. Individual and team web sites will be constructed. Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
HSPT-383 
Assessing and Improving Service Quality
Quality is essential in all sectors of the economy, especially service and health care. The course
lays a foundation for the use of quality tools and processes needed for improvement and innovation. The course teaches quality tools and processes which will be used in other HSPT courses
(like Senior Project). Topics range from a general overview of quality systems (like TQM, QFD,
and six sigma) to specific quality tools (like Pareto charts and activity network diagrams). The
course sets the foundation for Senior Project (HSPT-490). (Prerequisites: STAT-145 or 1016301 or 1016-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

HSPT-384 
Financial Concepts for Hospitality Managers
Students will apply accounting and finance concepts to hospitality industry business systems.
Hospitality industry case studies will involve analysis of balance sheets, profit and loss, cash
flow, budgeting, and cost control methods. Financial ratios important to the lodging and food
service industries such as RevPar, food and beverage cost percentages, room occupancy , and
average daily room rates will be examined. (Prerequisites: HSPT-181 and ACCT-110 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HSPT-475 
Responsible Entrepreneurial Leadership for the Hospitality Industry
This course teaches students how to become entrepreneurial leaders who focus on hospitality organizations of today and prepare for future challenges of designing effective hospitality
organizations. The following topics will be explored: hospitality organizations of the future,
entrepreneurial leadership traits, creating an enterprising culture in the hotel industry, lessons
from hospitality leaders. (Prerequisites: HPST-481 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
HSPT-477 
Marketing for Entrepreneurs in the Hospitality Industry
This course examines the merger of two traditionally distinct areas of study: marketing and
entrepreneurship. Whereas marketing research and texts commonly examine established firms
and entrepreneurship addresses new enterprises, entrepreneurial marketing blends the two
areas of research and considers marketing in hospitality and tourism new enterprises. Distinct
differences between traditional marketing and entrepreneurial marketing techniques will be
discussed within the context of tourism and hospitality sectors. The unique, proactive and innovative nature of entrepreneurial marketing will be explored through lectures and case study
analyses of hospitality firms. The course project provides for application-based learning and
field-based research. (Prerequisites: HSPT-381 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HSPT-481 
Leadership Innovation in Service Industries
As future leaders in the hospitality and service industry students will be called upon to create innovative organizational forms that are flexible enough to change with the demand and
information so essential for success. In this course students examine their style of leadership.
It also examines how the values, beliefs, expectations and assumptions of the members of the
organization affect the style of leadership that best suits the company. In addition students
analyze current leadership theory and how people learn to progress effectively as future leaders in the hospitality and service industries. (This course is restricted to students with at least
3rd year standing in HSPS-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HSPT-489 
Special Topics
This is an innovative course not currently in the approved curriculum. When the topic and
course outline are approved by the department chair, the course will be available to students
for registration. The course may be taken more than once since many topics can be offered
under this course number and title. Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
HSPT-490 
Senior Project
This is a capstone course requiring students to integrate skills and knowledge from other
courses by conducting research into an area of professional interest or concern in hospitality
or health care. The project incorporates gathering primary data, assessing and summarizing
the data, and drawing conclusions from the data. The conclusions drawn form the foundation
for recommendations for innovation and improvement. (Prerequisites: HSPT-383 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HSPT-499 
HSPT Co-op Co-op, Credits 0

HSPT Co-op

HSPT-518 
Global Tourism
Students will prepare for travel to a foreign country by learning about cultural expectations of
the region in class before traveling to the selected region to explore their customs and culture,
prime tourism attractions, and foods. Through a one- week study tour, students will be exposed
to speakers and sites that represent the policies and development that have given rise to tourism
development in such locations as Dubai, Croatia, Italy , and other countries of current interest.
Some example emphases might be:Dubai:Anticipated site visits will include the Palms projects,
Jumeirah Hotels and Resorts, Ski Dubai and new transportation projects. Cultural difference
between traditional western models of management, policy and development will be compared to examples in the Middle East. The influence of Arab culture and Muslim practices on
tourism and tourists in this region., and the economic impact o tourism growth in Dubai will
be explored through guest speakers. Croatia:The re-invention of tourism in a country after a
war, and the key role of tourism in economic development will be explored, along with local
tourism and cultural . Lecture 3, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall)
HSPT-599 
Independent Study Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3

Independent Study

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

11

College of Applied Science and Technology

Manufacturing Engineering Technology
MFET-105 
Machine Tools Lab
Proficeincy with traditional machine shop tools will be demonstrated with an emphasis on
safety. Students will demonstrate their abilities to interpret drawings and select the appropriate equipment needed to produce each part. Parts built will be inspected by the student to
verify the meeting of part requirements. Students will repair/replace any parts that are found
to be out of specifications. Inspection tools will be utilized in the product validation requirement of the course. Topics will be experimentally validated through the creation of mechanical
parts that will be assembled into a final product. (MFET-BS, MCET-BS, EMET-BS) Lab 2,
Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
MFET-120 
Manufacturing Processes
This course will focus on the understanding and application of manufacturing processes.
Students will be challenged to discover and learn how typical piece parts and assemblies are
manufactured. Topics include material properties and the following process families: casting,
material removal, deformation, consolidation, powder metallurgy, plastics fabrication, EDM,
water jet, chemical, LASERS, plasma, and rapid prototyping. (MFET-BS, MCET-BS, EMETBS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MFET-340 
Automation Control Systems
This course will provide a thorough understanding of the manufacturing automation principles, practices and system integration. Topics include a thorough coverage of the automation
hardware and software, essentials of digital and analog control using Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs), industry best practices for programming PLCs and the essentials of
Human Machine Interface (HMI) for data entry, manipulation and recording system status.
(Co-requisites: MFET-341 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MFET-341 
Automation Control Systems Lab
This course will provide a thorough hands-on experience in using Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs) for manufacturing automation and system integration. Industry best practices for programming PLCs and the essentials of Human Machine Interface (HMI) for data
entry, manipulation and recording system status will be included. (Co-requisites: MFET-340
or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
MFET-345 
Electronics Manufacturing
Course provides a thorough understanding of the technology, components, equipment, and
manufacturing process for through hole technology and surface mount technology electronics manufacturing. Students will develop a strong foundation needed for advanced work in
surface mount technology (SMT). (Prerequisites: PHYS-111 or PHYS- 211 or PHYS-211A or
equivalent course.Co-requisites: MFET-346 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
MFET-346 
Electronics Manufacturing Lab
The laboratory activities will provide the students an orientation and familiarization of the
manufacturing equipment and process parameters for electronics manufacturing including
through hole technology and surface mount technology. (Co-requisites: MFET-345 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
MFET-420 
Quality Engineering Principles
This course is designed to introduce the student to techniques required to maintain and
improve quality within manufacturing organizations and the service sector through the use
of statistical methodologies. The course covers concepts of quality, quality managements and
assurance, product quality, design of quality control chart, statistical process control, and quality improvement through design by considering concept development and implementation.
Traditional and modern quality systems will be discussed including the work of such quality gurus like Taguchi, Deming, Juran, and Shewhart. (Prerequisites: STAT-146 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MFET-436 
Engineering Economics
This course provides in depth coverage of Engineering Economic analysis, which is the financial
side of engineering decision making. Students are also taught ethical decision making through
an introduction to an engineering professional code of conduct. Project planning/management
are introduced to students. Presentation skills are enhanced with an emphasis on presenting
to executives. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MFET-445 
Robots and Automation
This course will provide coverage of Robotics applications, programming and tooling, as well as
computer numerical control (CNC) tool path creation for machining operations. (Prerequisites:
MCET-220 or equivalent course.Co-requisites: MFET-446 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 2 (Fall)
MFET-446 
Robots and Automation Lab
This laboratory course provides hands on experience with Robotics and CNC in manufacturing. (Co-requisites: MFET-445 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)

12	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MFET-450 
Lean Production and Supply Chain Operations
This course is designed to provide the student with knowledge of contemporary theories and
practices of operations management employed by world class manufacturing and distribution
organizations. Topics include TQM, MRP, JIT, lean manufacturing, six sigma, theory of constraints, work simplification and operations research. (Prerequisites: STAT-145 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MFET-456 
Advanced Concepts in Electronics Packaging
The advanced course in electronics packaging will provide a thorough coverage of the materials,
processes, failure and reliability of chip level and PCB level packaging. Specific topics include
single-chip, multi-chip, wafer level and 3D stacked packaging, smaller passives and embedded
passive component technology, advanced substrates and microvia technology, solder technologies, metallurgy and joint formation, thermal management, thermal and mechanical behavior
of packaging, failure analysis and reliability testing. (Prerequisites: MFET-345 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MFET-460 
Integrated Design for Manufacture and Assembly
Integrated Design for Manufacture & Assembly Manufacturing processes are expanded and
applied to the design process. Part concepts will be considered for various manufacturing
processes to determine which process will yield the lowest cost part that meets all product
functional requirements. Students will learn the DFMA methodology for making decisions
to analyze the costs associated with their product concepts. Designs will consider the tooling
that is required in product build and will understand the interrelationships between decisions
and the cost associated with manufacture and service of the product. At the conclusion of the
course students will be able to effectively design parts and assemblies for manufacture, assembly, and service. Costing will be considered at every step of the design process. (Prerequisites:
MCET-220 or equivalent course.Co-requisites: MFET-446 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
MFET-580 
Production Systems Design
Production Systems Design and Production Systems Development together form Manufacturing
Engineering Technology Senior Project. Students will design and produce a product, and a work
cell for manufacturing and packaging the product. Students will practice project planning and
communication while drawing on their technical skills to complete the project. The student with
be provided material/knowledge on the design and evaluation of manufacturing systems and
the use of computers in support of integrated product design, development and manufacturing
activities. Group technology, process planning, shop floor control, concurrent engineering and
flexible manufacturing systems are the principal topic areas. Communication amongst team
members and the project advisor about expectations and performance is essential. Design, final
documentation, and demonstration of successful operation are required (at the end of the corequisite sequence). (Prerequisites: MFET-340 and MFET-445 and MFET-460 or equivalent
courses.Co-requisites: MFET-590 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MFET-590 
Production Systems Development
This course focuses on the integrated design, process development, and assembly of fully
functional automated workcell and product. Process improvement becomes inherent in the
integrated activities. Business style communication amongst team members and the project
advisor about expectations and performance is essential. Design, final documentation, and
demonstration of successful fully functional automated workcell and assembly of a product
are required. (Prerequisites: MFET-340 and MFET-445 and MFET-460 or equivalent courses.
Co-requisites: MFET-580 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Mechanical Engineering Technology
MCET-101 
Fundamentals of Engineering
This course will introduce students to the disciplines in the field of mechanical engineering.
Students will be introduced to design and engineering problem solving methods that will be
applied to problems. Students will collect data, perform design calculations and solve equations. Project reports are generated through the integration of these tools with word processing
and presentation software. The application of software tools to the engineering design process
will be emphasized throughout. (Co-requisites: MFET-105 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
MCET-110 
Foundations of Metals
This class explores the commonly used engineering metals. Differentiation of materials, with
a focus on metals, is made based on an understanding and control of fundamental material
properties. This knowledge of properties and materials then informs analysis of which metals are selected for various applications. Corrosion and its mitigation are explored. Materials
selection software and internet resources are used. Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)

College of Applied Science and Technology

MCET-111 
Characterization of Metals Lab
This lab class accompanies the Foundations of Materials course. An emphasis is placed on
determining material, primarily metals, properties though experimentation and references,
and analyzing why a particular material was selected for an application based on the materials properties. Differentiation of materials families is made based on properties. A variety of
discovery activities are used to explore the world of metals, including labs of various types,
materials selection software, and internet resources. (Co-requisites: MCET-110 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
MCET-150 
Engineering Communication and Tolerancing
A course that integrates basic engineering techniques. These topics will emphasize the design
of components through the use of solid modelling, dimensioning, tolerancing, GD&T, and statistics. Students will be expected to build, inspect, and integrate their designs. (Co-requisites:
MFET-105 or equivalent course and this class is restricted to students in MFET-BS, MCET-BS,
EMET-BS or ENGTEH-BS.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-210 
Foundations of Non-Metallic Materials
This course will cover the process of selecting a best material for a given design application,
with a focus on polymeric materials. To support this process; material families, strengthening mechanisms and degradation mechanisms and prevention will be studied. The materials
selection process will include economic, ecological and ethical considerations. An emphasis is
placed on the interrelationship of structure, process and properties. This class expands upon
concepts presented in MCET110. (Prerequisites: (MCET-110 and MCET-111) or (NETS-110
and NETS-111) or 0610-211 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
MCET-211 
Characterization of Non-Metallic Materials Lab
This course will consist of laboratory experiences which focus on property characterization of
the properties of polymeric materials. (Co-requisites: MCET-210 or equivalent course.MCET210 Coreq) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
MCET-220 
Principles of Statics
This course provides an introduction to the analysis and design of structures and machines.
Students learn to calculate unknown forces using the concept of equilibrium and free body
diagrams and to calculate simple stresses and deflections for axially loaded members. Topics
include forces, moments, free body diagrams, equilibrium, friction, stress, strain and deflection. Examples are drawn from mechanical, manufacturing and civil engineering technology.
(This class is restricted to students with at least 2nd year standing in the MCET-BS or MFETBS or EMET-BS program.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCET-320 
Mechanical Dynamics with Applications
Principles of engineering dynamics and the solution of practical engineering problems using
engineering dynamics are studied. The dynamic analysis of particles and rigid bodies are performed using the three fundamental analytical methods. These include Force-Acceleration,
Work-Energy, and Impulse-Momentum methods. An emphasis is placed on the application of
these methods to the solution of real engineering problems. In addition, this course introduces
the study of vibration in a mass, spring and damper system. Students will evaluate real problems
experimentally, analytically and through computer simulation. (Prerequisites: Grade of C- or
better in MCET-221 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCET-330 
Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Power
This courses involves the study of the basics of fluid power. Areas of study are pressure viscosity,
turbulence, flow, thermal properties and displacement. Hydraulic/pneumatic components such
as pumps, actuators, valves accumulators, lines, directional controls, sealing devices servomechanisms, hydraulic fluids and fluid containers are studied. (MFET-BS, MCET-BS, EMET-BS)
Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCET-400 
Experimental Methods for MCET
This is a course in mechanical laboratory techniques and the preparation of laboratory reports.
Experiments utilize principles of statics, strength of materials and dynamics. Students work
independently and in groups to prepare formal and informal reports and an oral presentation. (Prerequisites: MCET-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Recitation 1, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
MCET-430 
Thermal Fluid Science I
This course provides an introduction to the properties of pure substances, gas laws, first and
second laws of thermodynamics, along with an introduction to fluid dynamics are studied
and applied. Students learn through an integrated presentation of thermodynamics and fluid mechanics how to approach and solve reasonable thermal-fluid problems. Topics include
the first law of thermodynamics, specific heat, ideal gases, work, energy, lumped systems,
thermal resistances, fluid statics, conservation of mass/energy, laminar, and turbulent flow.
Examples are drawn from mechanical, electrical-mechanical engineering technology. Lecture
3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

MCET-450 
Mechanical Analysis and Design I
In this course students will investigate how mechanical parts fail: static, fatigue, and surface modes. Students will analyze the stresses, apply failure theories, and design mechanical
components to last. The fatigue characteristics for given metal samples will be investigated
through experimentation, analysis, and deduction of experimental results. The computer is
used extensively in analysis, FEA, and design process. (Prerequisites: C- or better in MCET221 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCET-488 
Special Topic - Wind Power Systems Laboratory
Wind Power Systems Laboratory is a technical elective studying wind energy and power systems, primarily for electric power generation. The course includes wind resource mapping,
performance modeling, wind technology (rotor designs), energy storage (micro-scale) and small
wind power generation. (Prerequisites: PHYS-112, MATH-172, STAT-145 or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: MCET-489 or equivalent course.) Lab 1, Credits 1 (Spring)
MCET-489 
Special Topic - Wind Power Systems
Wind Power Systems is a technical elective studying wind energy and power, primarily for
electric power generation. The course includes the history of wind development, site selection and resource mapping, performance modeling, wind technology (turbines, generator and
towers), grid interconnection, energy storage and small wind power generation (distributed
power and off-grid). Wind power public policy and the current regulatory environment are
reviewed including the economic assessment for each area of wind energy implementation.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-112, MATH-172, STAT-145 or equivalent course. Co-requisites: MCET488 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
MCET-499 
MCET Co-op
One semester of appropriate work experience in industry. (Prerequisites: ENGT-299 or equivalent course.) Co-op, Credits 0
MCET-530 
Thermal Fluid Science II
This course provides an in-depth coverage on the application of the first and second law of
thermodynamics and conservation principles, mass and energy, to the analysis of open systems
and power cycles, including refrigeration, heat pump and power cycles. It also introduces the
fundamentals of heat transfer theory; conduction, radiation, free and forced convection, and
its application to heat exchangers including free surface and conduit flow. Case studies based
on real-world thermal systems are used to illustrate the connection between these interdisciplinary subjects. (Prerequisites: C- or better in MCET-430 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-535 
Thermal Fluid Systems Project
Students perform laboratory experiments in thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat
transfer. Students will do a group project involving the design/modification/analysis of a
Thermo-Fluid system, its instrumentation, method of test, data analysis and final report presentation. Special emphasis is placed on report preparation and computer-aided data reduction.
(Prerequisites: MCET-530 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
MCET-550 
Mechanical Analysis and Design II
All machines are comprised of individual components (springs, gears, fasteners, etc.) working
together as a system to accomplish a goal. This course integrates the components into the bigger picture of the system. The course culminates in the design and production of a machine.
(Prerequisites: MCET-450 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-551 
Mech Analysis and Design II Lab
All machines are comprised of individual components (springs, gears, fasteners, etc.) working
together as a system to accomplish a goal. This course integrates the components into the bigger picture of the system. The course culminates in the design and production of a machine.
Lab 2, Credits 1 (Spring)
MCET-560 
Alternative Energy
A technical introduction to alternative energy systems in the context of energy economics and
conventional energy sources. Topics include solar thermal, PV, wind, ocean current and tides,
geothermal, biomass and fuel cells. Project in the course will allow students to develop and
test an alternative energy system, component or device. Course is intended as first course in
alternative energy for MET students. (Co-requisites: MCET-530 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-563 
Power Plants
An introduction to industrial electric power generation and distribution. Students will learn
about the different types of electric generating plants; steam cycle, combined cycle, gas turbine,
Diesel, hydraulic. The electric power grid in North America will be introduced along with new
distribution technologies such as “smart grid” and high voltage DC. Environmental impacts
of all generation processes will be discussed. Regulations and economic aspects of the industry will also be a topic in this course. Field trips to generating plants will be a required part of
this course. (Co-requisites: MCET-530 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

13

College of Applied Science and Technology

MCET-567 
Energy Management for HVAC Systems
This course employs professional practice to the design of comfort conditioning systems for
building environments. The thermodynamics and processes of air heating, cooling, filtering,
ventilating and humidity control; the heat transfer of envelopes and the system components
required are developed. Those elements and systems are studied in the context of required
professional practices and relevant codes to optimize systems and components performance.
(Co-requisites: MCET-530 and MCET-568 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
MCET-568 
Energy Management for HVAC Lab
This course employs professional practice to the design of comfort conditioning systems for
building environments. The thermodynamics and processes of air heating, cooling, filtering,
ventilating and humidity control; the heat transfer of envelopes and the system components
required are developed. Those elements and systems are studied in the context of required
professional practices and relevant codes to optimize systems and components performance.
(Co-requisites: MCET-530 and MCET-567 or equivalent courses.) Lab 1, Credits 1 (Spring)
MCET-569 
Machinery Vibration
This course expands students’ machine design capabilities to include the effects of vibration.
The basic concepts of vibration and noise are covered. Emphasis is placed on machinery design
to minimize vibration and the use of vibration and noise for machinery condition monitoring. Environmental tests for vibration, shock, and noise are performed. Measurement tools
and computer analysis tools are utilized. (Prerequisites: MCET-320 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MCET-570 
Foundations of Nuclear Energy
Foundations of Nuclear Energy is an introduction to the nuclear power industry. The class will
cover the history of nuclear power as well as an introduction to the science of radiation and
nuclear power plants. The class will finish with the future of nuclear power, both in the US
and worldwide. Topics covered in this class will include basic nuclear reactor physics, fission
process, nuclear fuel cycle, types of reactors, reactor safety fundamentals, and waste disposal.
The class will also discuss the regulations, codes, and standards governing the nuclear industry.
(Restricted to students with at least 4th year standing in the MCET-BS, MFET-BS or EMET-BS
program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-574 
Fiber Reinforced Composites
Application-based study of fiber reinforced composites including properties, manufacturing
methods and application design. (Prerequisites: MCET-210 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2,
Credits 2 (Fall)
MCET-575 
Fiber Reinforced Composites Lab
Application based study of fiber reinforced composites including properties, manufacturing
methods and application design. Laboratory exercises support classroom study of properties
and manufacturing methods through fabrication and destructive testing of composites. Course
project allows student teams to design, fabricate and qualify composite components for specific applications. (Co-requisites: MCET-574 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall)
MCET-578 
Welding Principles
This course introduces students to the macroscopic and microscopic aspects of different types
of welding. Students will experience and learn different welding techniques such as MIG, TIG,
Stick and Oxyacetylene welding. Actual practice with the latest technologies such as MIG and
TIG will reinforce concepts and provide practical hands-on experience. Several sample test
parts will be welded in a lab and broken with a tensile tester to evaluate the calculated load
compared to the welded joint strength. Weld samples will also be microscopically inspected
to determine the HAZ (heat affected zone) of the material. Oxyacetylene and plasma cutting will be experienced. Interpreting weld symbols on drawings will be learned and applied.
(This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCET-580 
Plastics Manufacturing Technology
The course introduces fundamentals in plastic materials and processing technology to manufacture various plastic products in plastics industry. The course emphasizes new materials
and process selections for engineering applications and design. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MCET-582 
Robust Design
The fundamental principles of Robust Design are developed. The history of the Robust Design
engineering methodology is presented. The concepts of the loss function, concept selection,
parameter design and tolerance design will be covered. Metrics and analysis techniques are
developed to optimize the performance of product or process components in spite of their
design, manufacturing, or customer use environments. Specific attention will be paid to a
number of case studies to reinforce the student’s conceptualization of the methods and their
focus on engineering of optimized products and processes. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

14	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MCET-583 
Plastics Product Design
The study of design guidelines for plastic products based on the interrelationships between
design, the material selected, the manufacturing process selected, and the tooling to be used.
(Prerequisites: (MCET-210 and MCET-211) or 0610-416 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-585 
Product Ideation
Students learn the process of generating and formulating an idea, developing a Voice of the
Customer (VOC)survey, utilizing a House of Quality (HOQ) matrix for developing a product
requirements document, brainstorming and ranking concepts through the Plough Concept
Selection Matrix technique, among others. Patenting and intellectual property issues will be
discussed and selected ideas will be evaluated against patent searches. (This class is restricted
to students with at least 3rd year standing in MCET-BS, MFET-BS, EMET-BS or PACK-BS.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MCET-586 
Product Design and Development
Product development and design of new products is accomplished by using a multi-step process by most companies. Students will benefit from experiencing these steps as they develop
an idea into a product. In this course, students will learn to take an idea of a feasible design
and develop a detailed product definition using an industry standard process with common
practices such as the Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing, the selection of manufacturing and assembly techniques, Tolerancing Analysis, and Critical Parameter Management. (This
class is restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing in MCET-BS, MFET-BS, EMET-BS
or PACK-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCET-590 
Dynamics of Machinery
Students learn to solve kinematic and dynamic analysis problems for planar mechanisms with
applications ranging from manufacturing equipment to consumer products and the automotive
field. Both analytical and computer simulation methods are used. (Prerequisites: MCET-320
or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Packaging
PACK-101 
Introduction to Packaging
An in-depth overview of packaging. The course will include historical perspectives of packaging.
Students will explore the functions of packaging; and the materials, processes and technology
employed to protect goods during handling, shipment, and storage. A brief review of container types, package design and development, and research and testing are presented, along with
information about economic importance, social implications and packaging as a profession.
Students will research historical, current and future packages to gain better insight into the
world of packaging. Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-151 
Packaging Design I
The course develops knowledge of engineering design graphics and skills of package structure
design. Topics covered are basics of engineering design graphics, technical sketch, project plan,
design matrix and computer aided design (CAD). Emphasis is given to use SolidWorks - CAD
software to design typical packaging structures. The 10- week design project focuses on developing a packaging structure from an idea to a 3D virtual prototype. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PACK-152 
Packaging Design II
The course develops knowledge and skills in applying two computer software packages for packaging design: Artios CAD and Adobe Illustrator. Topics covered are builder and rebuilder,solid
modeling and drawing, animation, coloring and painting. Emphasis is given to create a typical
paperboard based carton with a proper structure and color usage. (Co-requisites: PACK-101
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
PACK-211 
Packaging Metals and Plastics
The study of packaging materials from extraction through conversion and production, physical and chemical properties and uses. Emphasis is on plastics and metals used in packaging
and other component materials. Recognized standard testing procedures are presented and
students gain practical experience in the operation of various testing instruments, interpretation of results, and evaluation of properties and performance characteristics. (Co-requisites:
PACK-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-212 
Packaging Paper and Glass
The manufacture, physical and chemical properties, and uses of common packaging materials. Emphasis is on paper, paperboard, wood, glass and pressurized packaging systems used
in packaging applications. Standard testing procedures will be presented as well as instruction
on testing equipment operation, data interpretation, evaluation of properties and performance
(Co-requisites: PACK-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)

College of Applied Science and Technology

PACK-301 
Packaging Materials
This first course in the packaging Science minor will provide students with the opportunity
to learn the basic properties and applications for the common packaging materials. Students
will be instructed in fundamental evaluation procedures and in the determination of material specifications. (Students in PACK-BS and PACK-2M are unable to enroll in this class.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-302 
Packaging Containers
This first course in the packaging Science minor will provide students with the opportunity
to learn the basic properties and applications for the common packaging container formats.
Students will be instructed in fundamental evaluation procedures and in the determination of
container design specifications. (Students in PACK-BS and PACK-2M are unable to enroll in
this class.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-311 
Containers I
A detailed study of primary packages that includes the history, manufacturing processes, characteristics, and applications for containers in direct contact with the product. Structural design,
chemical compatibility, and suitability of container for intended use are analyzed for basic container types. Students practice structural design and testing of prototype containers. Primary
emphasis is on flexible paper, foil, plastic and laminated materials and on selected processing
techniques. Topics to include folding cartons, heat seal technology and test methodologies,
permeability theory, modeling and empirical testing. (Prerequisites: PACK-151 and PACK-211
and PACK-212 or equivalent courses.Co-requisites: PACK-152 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-312 
Containers II
This course is a detailed study of primary packages. History, manufacturing processes characteristics and applications for containers in direct contact with the product. Structural design,
chemical compatibility and suitability of container for intended use are analyzed for basic container types. Students practice structural design and testing of prototype containers. Primary
emphasis is on rigid paperboard, glass, plastic and metal containers. (Prerequisites: PACK-151
and PACK-211 and PACK-212 or equivalent courses.Co-requisites: PACK-152 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Recitation, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-420 
Technical Communications
An introduction to the principles of effective written technical communication for the packaging professional. Topics include memos, business letters, summary activity reports, technical
proposals and research papers. Open only to Packaging Science majors. (Co-requisites: First
Year Writing (FYW).) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-421 
Packaging for Distribution
An exploration of different shipping, storage, and use environments common to various products and packages. Structural design of shipping containers for product physical protection
and methods for testing and predicting package performance are studied. Package converting processes will be studied to reinforce the economics of efficient and sustainable package
design. (Prerequisites: PACK-311 and PACK-312 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Recitation
1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-422 
Dynamics and Protective Packaging
The course defines the factors involved in assessing the potential damage to packaged items
resulting from impact and vibration forces in the handling, transport and storage environments. Students will be instructed in the use of basic shock and vibration test equipment,
apply standard test protocols and develop specific testing protocols from measured field data.
Based on data generated from testing activities, students will develop cushion designs to protect sensitive product components. (Prerequisites: PACK-421 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-430 
Packaging Regulations
This course begins with an overview of government laws and regulations applicable to the packaging industry. Students will then gain the hierarchical impact that regulations have on the
global supply chain, quality systems, patent innovation and workplace safety. (Prerequisites:
PACK-311 and PACK-312 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-451 
Packaging Development — Advanced Applications
Students will learn to plan and develop virtual and real packaging prototypes to reflect the
requirements of end users, assess the sustainability of the designs, and validate designs in
the supply chain. (Prerequisites: PACK-421 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1,
Credits 3 (Fall)
PACK-470 
Food Packaging
Study of food products, common methods of processing and preservation, impact on quality
and nutritional value of the product, and the relationships with common packaging methods
and distribution practices. Students required to deliver a project to support the objectives
of this course. (Prerequisites: PACK-311 and PACK-312 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

PACK-471 
Packaging Supply Chain
Market structures are analyzed in order to develop an understanding of how packaging relates
to the general economy. Students will learn how market traded derivatives are utilized to
protect against price volatility of packaging raw materials, utilization of Purchase Price Cost
Analysis to predict packaging pricing and price movements. Packaging contract analysis and
packaging pricing formula based pricing will be studied. Students are instructed in the use of
basic pricing reference materials for research purposes. (Prerequisites: PACK-421 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PACK-481 
Packaging for Marketing and End Use
The interrelationship between packaging and marketing, detailing how the retail consumer
package can be used as a marketing tool. Concentrates on a systematic approach to developing an optimum package for a given product to meet the demands of the retail market and end
user. Students gain practice in the development of a complete package system. (Prerequisites:
PACK-421 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-499 
Cooperative Work Experience
Off-campus work in an approved salaried position with cooperating company. (Third year
status) (AL1,2,3,4-DegS) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-530 
Packaging Sustainability and the Environment
Consideration of packaging in a social context. Factors that enhance secondary use, recycling,
recovery of resources and proper disposal are discussed. Package design in relation to solid
waste disposal and materials and energy shortages are considered. Other topics of interest are
discussed. Primarily a discussion class for senior students. Open to undergraduate non-majors.
(Prerequisites: (PACK-301 and PACK-302 ) or (PACK-311 and PACK-312) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PACK-531 
Packaging Process Control
An advanced course designed to give packaging students instruction process and quality control
techniques for packaging applications. The course will develop TQM skills for the evaluation of
packaging components and packaging manufacturing processes to design sustainable packaging. Topics include the concepts of zero defects, computer applications for control charts and
acceptance sampling. (Co-requisite: PACK-421 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PACK-535 
Characterization and Evaluation of Polymer Packaging
The course develops knowledge of integrated analytical techniques in characterization and
evaluation of polymer packaging. Topics covered are basics of polymer packaging production,
characterization of thermal properties, evaulation of barrier and mechanical properties for polymer packaging, as well as identification and development of multi layer package structures.
(Prerequisites: CHMG-122 and CHMG-123 and CHMG-201 and (PACK-211 or (PACK-301 and
PACK-302) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PACK-546 
Pharmaceutical and Medical Packaging
Students will define the types of packages used in medical and pharmaceutical product applications. Aeseptic packaging operations will be explained and demonstrated. Students will utilize
ISO 11607, parts 1and 2 and the AAMI TIR 22 for medical product packaging. A compliance
document and finished prototype for ISO 11607 will be required. (Prerequisites: (PACK-301
and PACK-302) or (PACK-311 and PACK-312) or equivalent courses.Co-requisites: PACK547 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
PACK-547 
Pharmaceutical and Medical Packaging Lab
Students will define the types of packages used in medical and pharmaceutical product applications. Aeseptic packaging operations will be explained and demonstrated. Students will utilize
ISO 11607, parts 1and 2 and the AAMI TIR 22 for medical product packaging. A compliance
document and finished prototype for ISO 11607 will be required. (Co-requisites: PACK-546
or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Spring)
PACK-550 
Packaging Machinery
A study of package forming and filling, closing, product/package identification, inspection,
and other machinery commonly used in packaging, plus consideration of handling and storage/retrieval systems. Students become aware of project management techniques, setting
timelines, critical path, and resource evaluation. Quality tools and issues along with quality
control processes are integrated into line and machinery designs. Students gain practice in
setting up complete production lines for packaging various products. (Prerequisites: (PACK301 and PACK-302 ) or (PACK-311 and PACK-312) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
PACK-555 
Import/Export Packaging
Study of the particular forms and requirements for packaging for the import/export environment. Preservation techniques, international logistics, bulk containers, packing requirements,
handling, transport and storage and related documentation. (Prerequisites: (PACK-301 and
PACK-302 ) or (PACK-311 and PACK-312) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

15

College of Applied Science and Technology

PACK-560 
Converting and Flexible Packaging
The course develops knowledge and techniques in converting and flexible packaging. Topics
covered are converting materials, quality control practice in converting, evaluation of packaging film and converting and applications in flexible packaging. (Prerequisites: CHMG-131
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
PACK-599 
PS Independent Study
Independent study, in consultation with the instructor, on any Packaging-related topic.
Approvals are necessary from the department chair. (Undergraduate Research and Independent
Study (pack-598 and 599) combined total credit allowed is limited to a maximum of 3 credits. Independent Study total credit limit maximum of eight credits ---- Independent Study,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Reserve Officer’s Training Corps-Air Force
AERO-101 
The Foundation of the United States Air Force I
This course and its follow-on provide the student with an introductory survey of the United
States Air Force (USAF) and the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC). In the
first semester, the course begins with an introduction to ROTC as well as the customs and courtesies and dress and appearance standards expected of Air Force officers. It continues with a
discussion on team building, military communication skills and interpersonal communications.
The organization of the Air Force and how the Air Force contributes to the accomplishment
of our national security objectives is also covered. The course concludes with an overview of
Air Force career opportunities and benefits. Leadership Laboratory is mandatory for AFROTC
contract/pursuing cadets and complements this course by providing cadets with followership
experiences. Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)
AERO-102 
Foundation of USAF II
This course covers an introduction to Air Force core values and offers the student an opportunity to learn about leadership, its principles, and its effective traits. The course demonstrates
knowledge of Air Force heritage and legacy. Students are also introduced to basic oral and
written communication skills. The course continues by exploring war, its basic principles,
and motivation. The course concludes with an understanding of the Air Force oath of office
and how human relations can affect them as an Air Force Officers. Leadership Laboratory is
mandatory for AFROTC contract/pursuing cadets and complements this course by providing
cadets with followership experiences. Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)
AERO-201 
History of Air Power I
This course examines the development of military air and space power from the first balloons
to the on-going conflicts in Afghanistan and other parts of the world, introduces fundamental principles associated with war in the third dimension, and employs historical examples to
explain the evolution of U.S. Air Force air and space power. The full course covers two academic
terms. This term focuses on examples from the earliest days of flight through the Cuban Missile
Crisis. This course also seeks to develop students’ communication skills through class participation, short writing and briefing assignments. AFROTC Leadership Laboratory (WMIL-006)
and AFROTC Physical Training (WMIL-001) complements this course by providing applied
followership and leadership experience and is mandatory for all AFROTC cadets. Other interested undergraduate students (non-cadets) will be considered for registration but must have the
Detachment Commander’s approval for this course and any required co-requisites (if desired).
Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
AERO-202 
History of Air Power II
This course examines the development of military air and space power from the first balloons
to the on-going conflicts in Afghanistan and other parts of the world, introduces fundamental principles associated with war in the third dimension, and employs historical examples to
explain the evolution of U.S. Air Force air and space power. The full course covers two academic
terms. This term focuses on examples from the Vietnam War to the “Global War on Terror.”
This course also seeks to develop students’ communication skills through class participation,
short writing and briefing assignments AFROTC Leadership Laboratory (WMIL-006) and
AFROTC Physical Training (WMIL-001) complements this course by providing applied followership and leadership experience and is mandatory for all AFROTC cadets. Other interested
undergraduate students (non-cadets) will be considered for registration but must have the
Detachment Commander’s approval for this course and any required co-requisites (if desired).
Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Spring)

16	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

AERO-401 
National Security Forces I
This course examines national security policy and process, regional issues, advanced leadership, air and space power functions and competencies. It is the first in a two-course sequence
during which you will study roles of the military in society; military justice and law; current
issues affecting the military profession; and regional cultural, politics and history. You will also
study air and space power functions and competencies and the responsibilities of officership.
Finally, this course also seeks to develop students’ communication skills through class participation, short writing and briefing assignments. AFROTC Leadership Laboratory (WMIL-006)
and AFROTC Physical Training (WMIL-001) complements this course by providing applied
followership and leadership experience and is mandatory for all AFROTC cadets. Other interested undergraduate students (non-cadets) will be considered for registration but must have the
Detachment Commander’s approval for this course and any required co-requisites (if desired).
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
AERO-402 
National Security Forces II
This course examines national security policy and process, regional issues, advanced leadership, air and space power functions and competencies. It is the second in a two-course sequence
during which you will study roles of the military in society; military justice and law; current
issues affecting the military profession; and regional cultural, politics and history. You will also
study air and space power functions and competencies and the responsibilities of officership.
Finally, this course also seeks to develop students’ communication skills through class participation, short writing and briefing assignments. AFROTC Leadership Laboratory (WMIL-006)
and AFROTC Physical Training (WMIL-001) complements this course by providing applied
followership and leadership experience and is mandatory for all AFROTC cadets. Other interested undergraduate students (non-cadets) will be considered for registration but must have the
Detachment Commander’s approval for this course and any required co-requisites (if desired).
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Reserve Officer’s Training Corps-Army
ARMY-101 
Introduction to Leadership
This course introduces you to the personal challenges and competencies that are critical for
effective leadership and the structure of the ROTC Basic courses which consist of ARMY 101,
102, 201, 202, Fall and Spring Leadership Labs, and LTC. You will learn how the personal development of life skills such as cultural understanding, goal setting, time management, mental/
physical resiliency, and stress management relate to leadership, officership, and the Army
profession. The focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of Army leadership dimensions, attributes and core leader competencies while gaining an understanding of
the ROTC program, its purpose in the Army, and its advantages for the student. Enrollment
must be approved by the Professor of Military Science. Students enrolled in Army ROTC must
register for Army Conditioning Drills (Physical Training) and Army Leadership Lab when registering for the ARMY-101 class. Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
ARMY-102 
Introduction to Tactical Leadership
This course covers the overview of leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problemsolving, listening, presenting briefs, providing feedback, and using effective writing skills. You
will explore dimensions of leadership attributes and core leader competencies in the context
of practical, hands-on, and interactive exercises. Enrollment must be approved by Professor of
Military Science. Students enrolled in Army ROTC must register for Army Conditioning Drills
(Physical Training) and Army Leadership Lab when you take the ARMY-102 class. Lecture,
Credits 2 (Spring)
ARMY-202 
Foundations of Tactical Leadership
This course examines the challenges of leading teams in the complex operational environment. The course highlights dimensions of terrain analysis, patrolling, and operation orders.
Further study of the theoretical basis of the Army Leadership Requirements Model explores
the dynamics of adaptive leadership in the context of military operations. ARMY-202 prepares
Cadets for ROTC 301. Cadets develop greater self awareness as they assess their own leadership
styles and practice communication and team building skills. Case studies give insight into the
importance and practice of teamwork and tactics in real-world scenarios. Enrollment must be
approved by the Professor of Military Science. Students enrolled in Army ROTC must register
for Army Conditioning Drills (PT) and Army Leadership Lab when they enroll in ARMY-202.
Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)

College of Applied Science and Technology

ARMY-301 
Adaptive Team Leadership
This is an academically challenging course where you will study, practice, and apply the fundamentals of Army leadership, Officership, Army values and ethics, personal development,
and small unit tactics at the team and squad level. At the conclusion of this course, you will be
capable of planning, coordinating, navigating, motivating and leading a team or squad in the
execution of a tactical mission during a classroom PE, a Leadership Lab, or during a Situational
Training Exercise (STX) in a field environment. Successful completion of this course will help
prepare you for success at the ROTC Leader Development and Assessment Course (LDAC)
which you will attend next summer at Fort Lewis, WA. This course includes reading assignments, homework assignments, small group assignments, briefings, case studies, and practical
exercises, a mid-term exam, and a final exam. You will receive systematic and specific feedback
on your leader attributes values and core leader competencies from your instructor and other
ROTC cadre and MSL IV Cadets who will evaluate you using the ROTC Leader Development
Program (LDP) model. Enrollment must be approved by the Professor of Military Science.
Students enrolled in Army ROTC must also register for Army Conditioning Drills (Physical
Fitness Training) and Army Leadership Lab Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
ARMY-302 
Applied Team Leadership
This is an academically challenging course where you will study, practice, and apply the fundamentals of Army leadership, Officership, Army values and ethics, personal development,
and small unit tactics at the team and squad level. At the conclusion of this course, you will be
capable of planning, coordinating, navigating, motivating and leading a team or squad in the
execution of a tactical mission during a classroom PE, a Leadership Lab, or during a Situational
Training Exercise (STX) in a field environment. Successful completion of this course will help
prepare you for success at the ROTC Leader Development and Assessment Course (LDAC)
which you will attend next summer at Fort Lewis, WA. This course includes reading assignments, homework assignments, small group assignments, briefings, case studies, and practical
exercises, a mid-term exam, and a final exam. You will receive systematic and specific feedback
on your leader attributes values and core leader competencies from your instructor and other
ROTC cadre and MSL IV Cadets who will evaluate you using the ROTC Leader Development
Program (LDP) model. Enrollment must be approved by the Professor of Military Science.
Students enrolled in Army ROTC must also register for Army Conditioning Drills (Physical
Fitness Training) and Army Leadership Lab. Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
ARMY-402 
Leadership in a Complex World
The course places significant emphasis on preparing cadets for their first unit of assignment.
It uses cased studies, scenarios, and “What Now, Lieutenant?” exercises to prepare cadets to
face the complex ethical and practical demands of leading as commissioned officers in the
United States Army. It develops cadet proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex
operations, functioning as a member of a staff, and providing performance feedback to subordinates. Cadets assess risk, make ethical decisions, and lead fellow ROTC cadets. Enrollment
must be approved by the Professor of Military Science. Students enrolled in Army ROTC must
also register for Army Conditioning Drills (Physical Fitness Training) and Leadership Lab.
Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
ARMY-501 
ARMY ROTC Independent Study
A supervised investigation within an ARMY ROTC area of student interest. Consent of the
instructor and departmental approval are required. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

17

Saunders College of Business

Saunders College of Business
Index
ACCT	Accounting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
BLEG	 Business Legal Studies.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
DECS	 Decision Sciences. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
FINC	Finance.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
INTB	 International Business .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
MGMT	Management. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
MGIS	 Management Information Systems .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
MKTG	Marketing. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

18
19
19
19
20
20
22
23

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Accounting
ACCT-110 
Financial Accounting
An introduction to the way in which corporations report their financial performance to interested stakeholders such as investors and creditors. Coverage of the accounting cycle, generally
accepted accounting principles, and analytical tools help students become informed users of
financial statements. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACCT-210 
Management Accounting
Introduction to the use of accounting information by managers within a business. Explores
the value of accounting information for the planning and controlling of operations, assessing
the cost of a product/service, evaluating the performance of managers, and strategic decision
making. (Prerequisites: ACCT-110 or NACC-205 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACCT-305 
Accounting Profession
This course consists of a series of workshops designed to introduce accounting students to the
skills needed to be successful in job and co-op searches and the transition into professional
life and careers. Students will establish their career goals, create relevant documents such as
resumes and cover letters, and develop skills needed to succeed in pursuing accounting positions or graduate school. Students will be expected to interact with business professionals, study
materials related to current and emerging trends in accounting and business, and develop professional deportment. Active class participation is required. Note: Matriculated in Saunders
undergraduate accounting program. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to students with at
least 2nd year standing in ACCT-BS program.Co-requisite: ACCT-360 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
ACCT-360 
Intermediate Financial Accounting I
Extensive exposure to the accounting cycle with full integration of the data flow in an accounting information system. Accounting theory developed by accounting standard-setting bodies is
covered in-depth. Generally accepted accounting principles are discussed as they apply to the
preparation of financial statements and the recognition and measurement of financial statement elements, primarily assets. International Financial Reporting Standards are introduced
as they relate to course subject matter. (Prerequisites: ACCT-210 or NACC-206 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ACCT-365 
Intermediate Financial Accounting II
In-depth consideration of generally accepted accounting principles and theory as they apply
to the recognition and measurement of common liabilities and stockholders’ equity, as well
as income taxes, pensions and leases. Issues related to dilutive securities, earnings per share,
accounting changes, revenue recognition, and the statement of cash flows are also addressed.
International Financial Reporting Standards are introduced as they relate to course subject
matter. (Prerequisites: ACCT-360 or 0101-408 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)
ACCT-399 
Accounting PT Co-op
Half semester of paid work experience in Accounting (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

18	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ACCT-420 
Personal and Small Business Taxation
A basic introductory course in federal income taxation. Emphasis is on taxation of individuals
and sole proprietorships. Topics include income measurement and deductibility of personal
and business expenses. (Prerequisites: ACCT-110 or NACC-205 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ACCT-430 
Cost Accounting
Intermediate-level coverage of operational budgeting and performance evaluation.
Development and use of cost data for external reporting and internal planning and control.
Topics include operational budgeting, performance evaluation, job costing, process costing,
joint product and by-product costing, service department cost allocation, standard costing,
activity-based costing, back-flush costing, and transfer pricing. Development of relevant cost
information for special purposes is also considered. (Prerequisites: ACCT-210 or NACC-206
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ACCT-440 
Advanced Taxation
A continuation of Personal and Small Business Taxation. Emphasis is on tax treatment of property transactions and taxation of business entities. Also covers the use of technology to prepare
complex returns and to research tax issues. (Prerequisites: ACCT-420 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
ACCT-445 
Accounting Information Systems
This course combines information systems concepts and accounting issues. In this course,
we discuss the conceptual foundations of information systems, their applications, the control and auditing of accounting information systems, and the system development process.
Topics include the business process, e-business, relational database, database design, computer
fraud and security, accounting cycle, system analysis and AIS development strategies. Students
analyze accounting information systems topics through problem solving, group project, presentations, exams, and case studies. (Prerequisites: ACCT-110 or NACC-205 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ACCT-450 
Accounting for Government and Not-for-profit Organizations
This course provides a detailed examination and discussion of the accounting principles used
by governmental and not-for-profit entities. The course focuses on the use of special funds for
such entities as state and local governments, colleges and universities, hospitals and other health
care entities, voluntary health and welfare organization, and other organizations. Students will
learn what characterizes an entity as one for which the GASB is the authoritative standard-setting body versus one for which the FASB is the authoritative standard-setting body and develop
an understanding of why two unique sets of accounting principles were developed to serve
these entities. (Prerequisites: ACCT-365 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ACCT-460 
Forensic Accounting and Fraud Examination
This course provides an introduction to the principles and methodologies of fraud detection and
prevention. Topics may include the nature and types of fraud, fraud investigation and detection,
financial statement fraud, consumer fraud, asset misappropriation, corruption, and tax evasion.
(Prerequisites: ACCT-210 or NACC-206 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ACCT-488 
Accounting Co-op Summer
One summer semester of paid work experience in Accounting. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
ACCT-489 
Seminar in Accounting
Study of accounting topics reflecting contemporary issues and/or current technological
advancements impacting the development, implementation and management of accounting, taxation, and auditing systems in organizations. Seminar topics have ranged from ethics
to computerized accounting systems. Topics for a specific semester will be agreed to prior to
the course offering. (Prerequisites: ACCT-210 or NACC-206 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ACCT-499 
Accounting Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in Accounting. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACCT-500 
Cost Management in Technical Organizations
A first course in accounting for students in technical disciplines. Topics include the distinction
between external and internal accounting, cost behavior, product costing, profitability analysis, performance evaluation, capital budgeting, and transfer pricing. Emphasis is on issues
encountered in technology-intensive manufacturing organizations. This course is not available
for Saunders College of Business students. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students
with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Saunders College of Business

ACCT-510 
Internal Auditing
Course explores the role of the internal audit function in the management of companies. Topics
include internal vs. external auditing, internal control issues, reliability and integrity of information; compliance with policies, procedures, laws and regulations; efficiency of operations.
Ethical considerations affecting the internal audit function are introduced. (Prerequisites:
ACCT-210 or NACC-206 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

DECS-445 
Managing Supplier Relations
This course introduces students to the subject of managing supplier relations and purchasing
activities. Topics covered include supplier selection, vendor pricing, materials quality control,
value analysis, make-or-buy, speculation and hedging, and international sourcing as well as
the legal and ethical constraints faced by purchasing practitioners. (This class is restricted to
undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3

ACCT-540 
Advanced Accounting
Investigates the application of generally accepted accounting principles to partnerships and
corporations with investments in subsidiaries. Issues involving consolidated financial statements, international accounting, and accounting for not-for-profit and governmental entities
are considered. (Prerequisites: ACCT-365 or equivalent course and 4th year standing.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)

DECS-489 
Seminar in Decision Science
Special topics seminars offer an in-depth examination of current events, issues and problems
unique to Decision Science. Specific topics will vary depending upon student and faculty interests and on recent events in the business world. Seminar topics for a specific semester will be
announced prior to the course offering. These seminars may be repeated for credit since topics
will normally vary from semester to semester. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking
undergraduate students.) Lecture, Credits 3

ACCT-599 
Independent Study Accounting
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor. Independent
Study, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Business Legal Studies
BLEG-200 
Business Law I
An introduction to legal principles and their relationship to business organizations. Explores
the U.S. legal system, the U.S. court system, civil and criminal procedure, the role of government agencies, legal research, and the substantive areas of law most relevant to business,
including constitutional law, tort law, criminal law, contract law, intellectual property, debtor-creditor relations, bankruptcy, business entities, securities regulation, and antitrust law.
(This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
BLEG-489 
Seminar in Business Law
Advanced study of business and legal topics reflecting contemporary issues and/or current technological advancements impacting the understanding of taxation, business, and legal issues
in organizations. Seminar topics may range from international intellectual property rights to
interactivity between taxation, law, and ethics. Topical coverage for a particular semester will
be announced prior to the course offering. (This course requires permission of the Instructor
to enroll.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Decision Sciences
DECS-225 
Management Science
A survey of quantitative approaches to decision making. Topics include formulation and solution of linear programming models, decision analysis and simulation. Involves use of computer
software. (Prerequisites: STAT-145 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
DECS-310 
Operations Management
A survey of operations and supply chain management that relates to both service- and goodsproducing organizations. Topics include operations and supply chain strategies; ethical
behavior; forecasting; product and service design, including innovation and sustainability;
capacity and inventory management; lean operations; managing projects; quality assurance;
global supply chains; and the impacts of technology. (Prerequisites: STAT-145 or MATH-251
or MATH-252 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
DECS-350 
Project Management
A study of the concepts and applications of project management. This course covers the organization and management of projects, including the role and responsibilities of the project
manager, team responsibilities, tools and techniques for project planning, budgeting, and control, work breakdown, risk assessment, and project termination. The learning environment will
include lectures and discussion, group exercises, case studies, and examinations. (This class
is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3
DECS-435 
Supply Chain Management
This course introduces the basic concepts in supply chain management as well as strategies
and practice, and examines important managerial issues. Topics covered include forecasting,
inventory management, third-party logistics, partnering, contracts, event management and
conflict resolution, e-business, and strategy. (Prerequisites: DECS-310 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3

	

DECS-499 
Decision Science Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in Decision Science (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
DECS-599 
Independent Study Decision Sciences
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor. (Instructor
approval) (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Finance
FINC-120 
Personal Financial Management
Examines financial decisions people must make in their personal lives. Covers personal taxation, housing and mortgages, consumer credit, insurance (including life, health, property
and casualty) and retirement and estate planning. Also reviews the common financial investments made by individuals, including stocks, bonds, money market instruments and mutual
funds. This class involves extensive use of the Internet for access to information. (Students
in the Finance Program may use this course only as a free elective, not as a course creditable
towards the Finance Program.) (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate
students.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FINC-220 
Corporate Finance
Basic course in financial management. Covers business organization, time value of money, valuation of securities, capital budgeting decision rules, risk-return relation, Capital Asset Pricing
Model, financial ratios, global finance and working capital management. (Prerequisites: (ECON101 or ECON-201) and ACCT-110 and (STAT-145 or STAT-251 or CQAS-251 or MATH-251 or
MATH-252 or STAT-205) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FINC-352 
Managing Assets and Liabilities
Advanced course in financial management. Covers project cash-flow analysis, issuance of
securities, cost of capital, debt policy, dividend policy, and market efficiency. (Prerequisites:
FINC-220 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FINC-359 
Financing New Ventures
The course focuses on financial issues affecting an entrepreneur. The course emphasizes, identifies and follows the wealth creation cycle. The wealth creation cycle begins with an idea for
a good, product or service, progresses to an initial company startup, passes through successive stages of growth, considers alternative approaches to resource financing, and ends with
harvesting the wealth created through an initial public offering, merger or sale. Identification
and valuation of business opportunities, how and from whom entrepreneurs raise funds, how
financial contracts are structured to both manage risk and align incentives, and alternative
approaches by which entrepreneurs identify exit strategies are reviewed. (This class is restricted
to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FINC-361 
Financial Institutions and Markets
This course provides a comprehensive survey of the major financial markets and institutions
in the U.S. and abroad. This course analyzes the important structural features of the major
markets and notes the interaction of the financial markets with the decisions of financial institutions, corporations, and the government. (Prerequisites: FINC-220 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FINC-362 
Intermediate Investments
Focuses on the financial investment problems faced by individuals and institutions. Theoretical
topics include asset pricing, hedging and arbitrage. Application topics include risk management in bond-and-stock portfolio context. A discussion of options, futures and swaps also is
included. (Prerequisites: FINC-220 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

19

Saunders College of Business

FINC-399 
Finance PT Co-op
Half semester of paid work experience in Finance (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FINC-420 
Finance in a Global Environment
Discusses the problems posed by the international financial environment in which corporations operate. In particular, students learn to quantify and manage risks arising from shifting
exchange rates. Other topics include exchange rate systems, international trade finance,
international capital budgeting, country risk analysis and long-term international financing.
(Prerequisites: FINC-220 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Summer)
FINC-430 
Advanced Corporate Financial Planning
This course focuses on strategic financial management of the corporation. It employs pedagogies that emphasize analysis and evaluation of applied financial problems. Topics include
working capital management, financial statement analysis, valuation, capital budgeting decisions, and risk management. (Prerequisites: FINC-352 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)
FINC-460 
Financial Analysis and Modeling
In this course, students learn to obtain and organize financial data and conduct financial analysis such as discounted cash flow analysis, risk analysis and financial forecasting. Sources of
data include web-based sources and proprietary databases. Excel will be the main software tool.
(Prerequisites: FINC-352 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FINC-470 
Introduction to Options and Futures
This course explores risk management from the viewpoint of a finance professional. The primary tools used are derivative instruments such as options, futures and swaps. Students learn
about the basic features of derivative instruments: how to value them, how they are traded,
and how to use them to mitigate various types of financial risk. (Prerequisites: FINC-220 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FINC-488 
Finance Co-op Summer
One summer semester of paid work experience in Finance. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
FINC-489 
Seminar in Finance
Special topics seminars offer an in-depth examination of current events, issues and problems
unique to finance. Specific topics will vary depending upon student and faculty interests and on
recent events in the business world. Seminar topics for a specific semester will be announced
prior to the course offering. These seminars may be repeated for credit since topics will normally vary from semester to semester. (Instructor determined) (This course is available to RIT
degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lecture, Credits 3
FINC-499 
Finance Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in Finance (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FINC-599 
Independent Study Finance
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor. (Instructor
approval) (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

International Business
INTB-225 
Global Business Environment
Being an informed global citizen requires an understanding of the global business environment. Organizations critical to the development of the global business environment include
for-profit businesses, non-profits, governmental, non-governmental, and supranational agencies. This course introduces students to the interdependent relationships between organizations
and the global business environment. A holistic approach is used to examine the diverse economic, political, legal, cultural, and financial systems that influence both organizations and the
global business environment. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate
students.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
INTB-300 
Cross-Cultural Management
This course explores the key implementation issues facing global businesses and those firms
wishing to expand into the global arena. An emphasis is placed on issues related to the topic of
culture. The course examines its impact on management, individuals, groups and how it affects
organizational performance. Leadership styles, in the cross-cultural context, will be deconstructed as will communication, decision-making, negotiation, and motivation. (Prerequisites:
INTB-225 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

20	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

INTB-310 
Regional Business Studies
An introduction to the most important and the fast growing economic entities to the students
such as the European Union, China, India, and Brazil. The course introduces the idiosyncratic
competitive environment in these major economies, the unique business models of the local
ventures, and the business opportunities and the hidden risks in these markets. The course
will also develop students with the necessary knowledge base and skills to compete with and
in these major economies. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd
year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
INTB-320 
Global Marketing
A hands-on course focusing on developing marketing strategies for entering and competing in foreign countries. Topics include foreign market opportunity assessment, developing
commercialization and entry strategies, understanding foreign customers and distribution
channels, and communicating value through advertising and promotion in different markets.
(Prerequisites: MKTG-230 or NBUS-227 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
INTB-399 
International Business PT Co-op
Half semester of paid work experience in International Business (This class is restricted to
undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
INTB-480 
Specialized Topics in Global Business
This course is designed to educate students on how to conduct business in a foreign region
or a global industry in depth. After taking this class, students should have a thorough understanding of how to conduct business associated with this specific region or the global industry.
(This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture
45, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTB-488 
Intl. Bus Co-op Summer
One summer semester of paid work experience in International Business. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
INTB-499 
International Business Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in International Business (This class is restricted to
undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
INTB-550 
Global Entry and Competition Strategies
This course explores the strategic challenges faced by businesses operating in a global environment. It emphasizes the development of strategies under differing perspectives, globalization
or regionalization of competitive marketplace, creating value for the firm globally, entry mode
management, global CSR and governance. (Prerequisites: INTB-225 or equivalent course and
4th year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Management
MGMT-035 
Careers in Business
This course consists of a series of workshops designed to introduce business students to the
skills needed to be successful in job and coop searches and applications to graduate schools.
Students will establish their career goals, create material (e.g., resume, cover letter), and acquire
skills needed to achieve these goals. (AL2-DegS) Lecture 8, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-070 
Professional Skills Seminar
This series of non-credit workshops and lectures provides students with the tools needed for
successful completion of Saunders College of Business graduate programs. SCB graduate students will develop and practice essential skills, including critical thinking, how to analyze a
case, oral and written communications, working in a team environment, and academic ethics. Students become familiar with career management strategies including resume writing,
interviewing techniques, career planning and how to search for a co-op or permanent job.
Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall)
MGMT-101 
Business 1: Ideas and Business Planning
This is the first of a two-course sequence comprising the freshman integrated experience. In
Business 1 students will be introduced to the key functional areas of business, the evaluation
of new business opportunities, and the business plan process. By applying the creative process, students will conceive new business ideas that will be developed In Business 2. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)

Saunders College of Business

MGMT-150 
The World of Business
Designed as an introductory course for students not in the Saunders College that want to learn
more about the fundamentals of business. This course provides an overview of the functions
and processes of business organizations. Topics include the role and responsibility of the manager, the processes and functions of business, the impact of technology, business planning
process, doing business in global environments, and career exploration. Only non-business
program students and students who have not taken BUS 1 may take The World of Business.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-215 
Organizational Behavior
As an introductory course in managing and leading organizations, this course provides an
overview of human behavior in organizations at the individual, group, and organizational level
with an emphasis on enhancing organizational effectiveness. Topics include: individual differences, work teams, motivation, communication, leadership, conflict resolution, organizational
culture, and organizational change. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at
least 2nd year standing.) Lecture, Recitation, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT-300 
Air Force Management and Leadership I (AS 300)
AF Management and Leadership (AS 300) courses emphasize the concepts and skills required
of the successful young officer, manager and leader. The first course includes applied written
and oral communication techniques, coordination, and history of management theory, analytic methods of decision making, strategic and tactical planning, various leadership theories
and followership. The second course stresses organizing, staffing, controlling, counseling,
human motivation and group dynamics, ethics, managerial power and politics, managing
change, career development, and performance appraisal. Actual Air Force case studies are
used to enhance the learning process. *Note This course is restricted to AF ROTC Students.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MGMT-301 
Air Force Management and Leadership II (AS 300)
Integrated management and leadership courses emphasize the concepts and skills required
of the successful young officer, manager, and leader. The first course includes applied written
and oral communication techniques, coordination, history of management theory, analytic methods of decision-making, strategic and tactical planning various leadership theories,
and followership. The second course stresses organizing, staffing, controlling, counseling,
human motivation and group dynamics, ethics, managerial power and politics, managing
change, career development, and performance appraisal. Actual Air Force case studies are
used to enhance the learning process. *Note This course is restricted to AF ROTC Students.
(Prerequisites: MGMT-300 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MGMT-310 
Leadership in Organizations
This course will explore the character, personal attributes, and behaviors of effective leaders
in organizations. The course includes an overview of leadership research, theory, and practice,
with an emphasis on developing an actionable leadership development plan. (Prerequisites:
MGMT-215 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-330 
Design Thinking and Concept Development
Design thinking is a process that aids collaboration among designers, technologists, and business professionals. The process provides a structured creative process for discovering and
developing products, services, and systems for profit and non-profit applications. Students
will apply a wide range of design tools in a hands-on project. Topics include problem-framing, end-user research, visualization, methods for creative idea generation, and prototyping.
(This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-350 Entrepreneurship
This course studies the process of creating new ventures with an emphasis on understanding
the role of the entrepreneur in identifying opportunities, seeking capital and other resources,
and managing the formation and growth of a new venture. It addresses the role of entrepreneurship in the economy and how entrepreneurial ventures are managed for growth. (This
class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT-360 
Digital Entrepreneurship
Digital Entrepreneurship brings together state-of-the-art knowledge in digital business practices with basic instruction in entrepreneurship and business planning. This highly interactive,
applied experience will allow students to develop business ideas, discover RIT resources that
support new ventures, network with and learn from industry experts, and complete a professional plan to communicate and advance a digital business venture. Student work for this
course will involve research and analysis of electronic marketplaces and, ultimately, the design
and development of competitive digital startups. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

MGMT-380 
Human Resource Management
This course is an introduction to the basic concepts in human resource management (HRM),
with an emphasis on developing HRM skills that are important to any manager, not only to
those who plan to work in the HRM functional area. It is not intended to prepare one to be a
human resource specialist, but rather aims to provide one with an overview of human resource
management and the context in which it operates. The course emphasizes experiential learning and interactive discussions, in order to provide a level of learning beyond simple content
knowledge in the HRM field. Instructional methods will include readings, mini-lectures, discussions, case analyses, and exercises. (Prerequisites: MGMT-215 or equivalent course and 3rd
year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-399 
Management PT Co-op
Half semester of paid work experience in Management (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT-420 
Managing Innovation and Technology
This course focuses on commercializing technology, and gives students the chance to work on
real business projects involving new technology. Topics covered include assessing inventions
for market readiness, drivers of innovation, technology-driven entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship, managing different types of innovation, and the construction of a technology
strategy for a firm or business unit. Students learn how to understand both technology and
business perspectives as well as how to formulate a profitable technology strategy. Projects
focus on current situations in real companies, including, on occasion, student-owned startup
companies. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-470 
Applied Entrepreneurship and Commercialization
This course enables students to gain course credit, in association with the RIT Student
Development Lab, for advancing a business concept, working on a multi-disciplinary product commercialization team, or working with an existing entrepreneurial venture. Students
must apply for admission into this program and follow the guidelines provided by the RIT
Entrepreneurship Program. (Permission of instructor) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
MGMT-488 
Management Co-op Summer
One summer semester of paid work experience in Management. (This class is restricted to
undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
MGMT-489 
Seminar in Management
Special-topics seminars offer an in-depth examination of current events, issues and problems
unique to management. Specific topics will vary depending upon student and faculty interest and on recent events in the business world. Seminar topics for a specific semester will be
announced prior to the course offering. These seminars may be repeated for credit since topics
normally vary from semester to semester. (topic-dependent) Lecture, Credits 3
MGMT-499 
Management Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in Management. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT-550 
Field Experience in Business Consulting
Students nearing the completion of their program work in consulting teams to assist startup
ventures and/or small businesses. Problems are isolated and solutions then developed. Affiliated
course projects may focus on a number of areas. For example, they may seek to develop commercialization plans for specific technologies, products, or services; focus on unique problems
associated with small businesses, and develop growth strategies. (This class is restricted to
undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGMT-560 
Strategy and Innovation
A capstone course drawing upon major business functions, accounting, finance, marketing,
operations management, and organizational theory, as well as the key concepts of innovation.
The course provides an integrated perspective of business organizations toward the achievement of enhanced profitability and a sustainable competitive advantage. Topics include the
analysis of business environments, industry attractiveness, competitive dynamics, and innovation management. Students learn how to formulate and implement effective business-level,
corporate-level, global, and innovation strategies. (Prerequisites: MGMT-215 and MKTG-230
and FINC-220 and DECS-310 or equivalent courses and 4th year standing.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT-599 
Independent Study Management
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor. *Note:
Instructor approval. Independent Study, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

21

Saunders College of Business

Management Information Systems
MGIS-102 
Business 2: Technology-enabled Launch
This course, the second course in the first-year business sequence, applies technology tools
to create well defined and complete business plans. Students will develop websites and other
marketing and process tools to take their business concept outlined in Business 1 to a final
business plan for review with an outside board. (Prerequisites: MGMT-101 and MGIS-101 or
equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MGIS-103 
Business 2T: Technology Enabled Launch (Transfers)
This course is designed to provide transfer students the experience of developing a new business concept from ideation through launch. It will provide an emphasis on design thinking.
Students will work in times to develop a new business idea. They will then put together a
detailed business plan integrating the key functional business elements into a cohesive plan
for launch. (World of Business or similar course at another college, or enrolled in two business
courses while taking 2T, MGIS-101 (Co-requisite: MGIS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-120 
Business Computer Applications
The primary focus of the course is to provide students with hands-on skills in using computers
as productivity tools in the workplace. Students will be exposed to a combination of advanced
productivity software including word processors, spreadsheets and presentation graphics applications. Hands-on exercises and assignments will help to develop computer proficiency and
problem-solving skills. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-130 
Information Systems and Technology
To be successful in our globally-networked business environment, contemporary management
professionals must have a strong grounding in the principles of information and information
technology. This course provides an introduction to the field of management information systems (MIS), including the tools and techniques for managing information and information
technologies within organizations. We place a particular emphasis on the nature of systems,
the role of information in business processes, the management of data, and the planning of
MIS design projects. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-201 
Business Information Systems Processes
Managers, professionals and business technologists manage, maintain or participate in business
processes. This course is an introduction to the basic business processes involved in organizations and the information systems that support them. Students examine the relationship
between business processes and information systems and the qualities of good information.
Students observe how these concepts are applied through hands-on exposure to an enterprise
resource planning (ERP) system, such as SAP R/3. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MGIS-320 
Database Management Systems
Transforming data into information is critical for making business decisions. This course introduces students to the concepts of data, information and the business database management
systems (DBMS) used by modern organizations. Exercises and hands-on projects are used to
model the information needs of an organization and implement and query databases using
applications such as Microsoft Access and SQL. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-330 
Systems Analysis and Design
Successful organizations utilize a systematic approach to solve real-world business problems
through the use of computing resources. Students who complete this course will be able to
design and model business processes. They will learn how to conduct requirements analysis,
approach the design or redesign of business processes, model system functions, effectively communicate systems designs to various levels of management, work in a project-based
environment, and approach the implementation of a new organizational information system.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-350 
Developing Business Applications
Development of business applications is transforming from programming to integration
of software components using application development environments. Students learn the
fundamentals of computer programming and applications development through a set of
programming exercises that focus on visual development environments and component
integration. These exercises expand into a project where students apply concepts of typical
development and project methodologies to complete a comprehensive programming assignment. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MGIS-360 
Building a Web Business
This course gives students both a conceptual and hands-on understanding of the launching of
web businesses. Students will study the full process of web business creation, including domain
name registration, frameworks for application creation, hosting of web applications and search
engine optimization. Students will apply their knowledge by designing and building a business
website that can actually make money. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

22	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MGIS-399 
Management Information Systems PT Co-op
Half semester of paid work experience in Management Information Systems (This class is
restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
MGIS-415 
Object-oriented Business Programming
Object-oriented Programming (OOP) will prepare students to plan and implement systems
using the OO approach. This course will build on earlier programming classes, and will emphasize the programming practices of polymorphism, inheritance and data hiding. (Prerequisites:
MGIS-350 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MGIS-425 
Database Systems Development
This course builds upon the basic concepts from Database Management Systems (MGIS-320).
Students work in a real-world business database development environment and gain hands-on
experience in advanced database querying language, such as Oracle PL/SQL. Students learn to
analyze business processes and, using tools such as Oracle, develop fully functioning database
prototype systems to support them. (Prerequisites: MGIS-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-435 
Advanced Systems Analysis and Design
Object-oriented analysis and design concepts and techniques are covered. Computer-aided
software engineering (CASE) software and software quality metrics are introduced. Students
that successfully complete this course and the prerequisite Systems Analysis & Design will have
acquired a comprehensive foundational knowledge of systems analysis and design concepts
currently used in systems development environments. (Prerequisites: MGIS-330 or equivalent
course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MGIS-445 
Web Systems Development
Students in this class will analyze business problems and develop data-driven web applications
to solve them. An industry-level application server will provide the framework for integrating
and deploying a set of client and server technologies to create these applications. Development
skills will include presenting and receiving information through a website, validating entered
information, and storing entered information in text files or databases. Students will design
solutions using Hypertext Markup Language, client scripting and server programs for database and file access. (Prerequisites: MGIS-350 and MGIS-320 or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-450 
Enterprise Systems
This course explores the role of enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems in organizations.
Students analyze cross-functional business processes and ERP systems commonly used to support these processes. Students engage in a hands-on project using a current ERP system, such as
SAP R/3, to demonstrate, analyze and design system structures, key data elements and process
configurations that support cross-functional business processes, including accounting, sales,
material management, production and distribution. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MGIS-488 
Mgmt. Info. Sys. Co-op Summer
One summer semester of paid work experience in Management Information Systems. (This
class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits
0 (Summer)
MGIS-489 
Seminar in MIS
Advanced study of MIS topics reflecting contemporary issues and/or current technological
advancements impacting the development, implementation and management of information
systems in organizations. Seminar topics have ranged from new technological developments to
management security issues in MIS systems. Topics for a specific semester will be announced
prior to the course offering. Lecture, Recitation, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-499 
Management Information Systems Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in Management Information Systems (This class is
restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
MGIS-550 
MIS Capstone
This capstone course for MIS majors applies the concepts of project management and techniques for estimating, planning and controlling of resources to accomplish specific project goals.
Students complete a team project requiring them to develop an innovative information system
while utilizing project management techniques. Students analyze real business situations and
develop IT-based innovative solutions for problems encountered. (Prerequisites: MGIS-320
and MGIS-330 or equivalent courses and 4th year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MGIS-599 
Independent Study Management Information Systems
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor. (Instructor
approval) Independent Study, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

Marketing
MKTG-230 
Principles of Marketing
An introduction to the field of marketing, stressing its role in the organization and society.
Emphasis is on determining customer needs and wants and how the marketer can satisfy those
needs through the controllable marketing variables of product, price, promotion and distribution. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 2nd year standing.)
Lecture, Recitation, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MKTG-310 
Marketing Metrics and Research
A study of research methods used to understand the changing needs of customers in order
to guide the decision-making of marketing managers. Emphasizes the data-driven elements
of marketing by integrating key marketing metrics with marketing research. Topics include
problem formulation, sources of marketing data, research design, data collection, selection
and calculation of metrics and statistical analysis. (Prerequisites: MKTG-230 and STAT-146
or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

MKTG-550 
Marketing Management
A capstone course that gives the student an in-depth knowledge of middle- and upper-management-level marketing problems and processes. Topics include tools used by marketing
managers in the development, implementation and control of marketing plans. (Prerequisite
or Co-requisites: MKTG-310 and MKTG-499 or equivalent course and 4th year standing.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MKTG-599 
Independent Study Marketing
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor. (Instructor
approval). Independent Study, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

MKTG-340 
Product and Service Commercialization
An introduction to the tools, skills, and knowledge required to minimize the inherent risks in
commercialization of new products and services. This course will focus on marketing management techniques and processes that are common to commercialization, such as scanning
the external environment, defining a product concept, capturing the Voice of the Customer,
and creating marketing plans. (Prerequisites: MKTG-230 or NBUS-227 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MKTG-350 
Buyer Behavior
A study of the determinants of buying behaviors. Emphasis is on identifying target markets
and customer needs, internal and external influences on lifestyle and understanding the buying decision process. (Prerequisites: MKTG-230 or NBUS-227 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MKTG-360 
Professional Selling
Selling concepts, tools, strategies, and tactics are discussed as they apply to both external and
internal customers. Students learn and experience some of problems faced and rewards earned
by those in professional sales. Customer relationship management/partnering with customers and truly seeking to meet their requirements are discussed as key to long-term success.
(Prerequisites: MKTG-230 or NBUS-227 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MKTG-370 
Advertising and Promotion Management
An in-depth view of tools of promotion management: advertising, sales promotion, public
relations, personal selling, direct marketing and Internet marketing as well as new and alternative media. Basic concepts of how to use print, broadcast, Internet and out-of-home media are
studied. Planning, budgeting, creative strategy and the roles of advertising agencies are also covered. (Prerequisites: MKTG-230 or NBUS-227 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MKTG-399 
Marketing PT Co-op
Half semester of paid work experience in Marketing. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MKTG-410 
Search Engine Marketing and Analytics
An examination of search engine marketing strategies to maximize site traffic, lower customer
acquisition costs and boost conversion rates. Marketing frameworks provide the basis for the
hands-on examination of search engine marketing and web analytics. (Prerequisites: MKTG320 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MKTG-420 
Advanced Internet Marketing
An advanced course that gives students an in-depth knowledge of Internet theories, marketing problems, and processes. The course will enable students to critically evaluate the Internet
marketing planning process. It integrates the core principles, tools and tactics necessary to succeed online. (Prerequisites: MKTG-410 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MKTG-488 
Marketing Co-op Summer
One summer semester of paid work experience in Marketing. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
MKTG-489 
Seminar in Marketing
Current issues in marketing are the focus of the course. Topics have included direct and database marketing, pricing, advanced marketing research and other current issues in marketing
based on student and faculty interest. (Prerequisites: MKTG-230 or NBUS-227 or equivalent
course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3
MKTG-499 
Marketing Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in Marketing. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

23

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

B. Thomas Golisano College of
Computing and Information Sciences
Index
CSCI	
CSEC	
CINT	
ISTE	
IGME	
MEDI	
NSSA	
SWEN	

Computer Science.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Computer Security. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Computing Exploration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Information Sciences and Technologies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Interactive Games and Media. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Medical Informatics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Networking, Security, and Systems Administration. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Software Engineering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

24
26
24
28
31
34
35
36

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Computing Exploration
CINT-101 
Computing Exploration Seminar
A one credit-hour course for the Computing Exploration students, including an overview of
the computing disciplines and an introduction to six computing and informatics academic
programs: Information Technology, Computer Science, Software Engineering, Information
Security and Forensics, Medical Informatics, and Networking and Systems Administration.
Curricula requirements of the six programs and career opportunities in the computing fields
are discussed. Potential employers discuss job opportunities. Introductions to the faculty,
students, and laboratory facilities of the six programs are provided. Cooperative education,
study abroad, and innovation fellowship program opportunities available to the students are
explored. Lecture 1.25, Credits 1 (Fall)
CINT-151H 
Honors Seminar
This honors seminar is a foundational course that examines how our social worlds are linked
to our physical and material worlds. The corresponding emphasis on inquiry, analysis, and
interpretation facilitates student-engaged learning. In exploring pertinent issues/topics through
an experiential, active, and site-specific curricular focused learning, various aspects of the
human condition are discovered. The theme or topic of this honors seminar, as chosen by the
instructor, is announced in the subtitle as well as course notes and is developed in the syllabus.
The honors seminar integrates the required YearOne curriculum. Lecture 1, Credits 0 (Fall)

Computer Science
CSCI-101 
Principles of Computing
This course is designed to introduce students to the central ideas of computing. Students
will engage in activities that show how computing changes the world and impacts daily lives.
Students will develop step-by-step written solutions to basic problems and implement their
solutions using a programming language. Assignments will be completed both individually
and in small teams. Students will be required to demonstrate oral and written communication skills through such assignments as short papers, homeworks, group discussions and
debates, and development of a term paper. Computer Science majors may take this course
only with department approval, and may not apply these credits toward their degree requirements. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSCI-140 
Computer Science for AP Students
This accelerated course covers material from the first-year sequence of courses and provides the
foundation for all subsequent Computer Science courses. The course stresses problem solving
while covering modern software development techniques and introducing essential software
tools. Topics include tree and graph structures, nested data structures, objects, classes, inheritance, interfaces, object-oriented collection class libraries for abstract data types (e.g. stacks,
queues, maps, and trees), and static vs. dynamic data types. Concepts of object-oriented design
are a large part of the course. Software qualities related to object orientation, namely cohesion, minimal coupling, modifiability, and extensibility, are all introduced in this course, as
well as a few elementary object-oriented design patterns. Input and output streams, graphical
user interfaces, and exception handling are covered. Note: Requires department permission
for registration. Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall)

24	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CSCI-141 
Computer Science I
This course serves as an introduction to computational thinking using a problem-centered
approach. Specific topics covered include: expression of algorithms in pseudo code and a programming language; functional and imperative programming techniques; control structures;
problem solving using recursion; basic searching and sorting; elementary data structures such
as lists, trees, and graphs; and correctness, testing and debugging. Assignments (both in class
and for homework) requiring a pseudo code solution and an implementation are an integral
part of the course. An end-of-term project is also required. Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall,
Spring)
CSCI-142 
Computer Science II
This course delves further into problem solving by continuing the discussion of data structure use and design, but now from an object-oriented perspective. Key topics include more
information on tree and graph structures, nested data structures, objects, classes, inheritance,
interfaces, object-oriented collection class libraries for abstract data types (e.g. stacks, queues,
maps, and trees), and static vs. dynamic data types. Concepts of object-oriented design are
a large part of the course. Software qualities related to object orientation, namely cohesion,
minimal coupling, modifiability, and extensibility, are all introduced in this course, as well as
a few elementary object-oriented design patterns. Input and output streams, graphical user
interfaces, and exception handling are covered. Students will also be introduced to a modern
integrated software development environment (IDE). Programming projects will be required.
(Prerequisite: CSCI-105 or CSCI-141 or CSCI-242 or CSCI-140 or 4003-242 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-243 
The Mechanics of Programming
Students will be introduced to the details of program structure and the mechanics of execution
as well as supportive operating system features. Security and performance issues in program
design will be discussed. The program translation process will be examined. Programming
assignments will be required. (Prerequisites: CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003-243
or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-250 
Concepts of Computer Systems
An introduction to the hardware and software organization of computer systems. The course
emphasizes a multilevel model of computer organization. Topics include the digital logic level; the micro architecture level; the machine instruction set level; the operating system level;
and the assembly language level. Programming assignments will be required. (Prerequisites:
(CSCI-243 or 4003-334) and (MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1016-366) or equivalent courses.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-251 
Concepts of Parallel and Distributed Systems
This course is an introduction to the organization and programming of systems comprising
multiple computers. Topics include the organization of multi-core computers, parallel computer clusters, computing grids, client-server systems, and peer-to-peer systems; computer
networks and network protocols; network security; multi-threaded programming; and network
programming. Programming projects will be required. (Prerequisites: CSCI-243 or 4003-334
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-261 
Analysis of Algorithms
This course provides an introduction to the design and analysis of algorithms. It covers a variety of classical algorithms and data structures and their complexity and will equip students
with the intellectual tools to design, analyze, implement, and evaluate their own algorithms.
(Prerequisites: (CSCI-243 or 4003-334) and (MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1016-366) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-262 
Introduction to Computer Science Theory
This course provides an introduction to the theory of computation, including formal languages,
grammars, auto-mata theory, computability, and complexity. (Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or
MATH-200 or 1016-366) and (CSCI-140 or CSCI-141 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003-242)
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-263 
Honors Introduction to Computer Science Theory
This course provides a challenging introduction to the theory of computation with an emphasis
on problem solving. Topics include formal languages, grammars, auto-mata theory, computability, and complexity. (Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1016-366) and (CSCI-141
or 4003-242) or equivalent courses and students in the Honors Program.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall)
CSCI-264 
Honors Analysis of Algorithms
This course provides a challenging introduction to the design and analysis of algorithms with
an emphasis on problem solving and algorithmic research. It covers a variety of classical algorithms and data structures and their complexity, as well as deeper coverage of more advanced
material; for example, linear programming, approximation algorithms, and randomized algorithms. The course will equip students with the intellectual tools to design, analyze, implement,
and evaluate their own algorithms. (Prerequisites: CSCI-243 and MATH-190 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

CSCI-320 
Principles of Data Management
This course provides a broad introduction to the principles and practice of modern data management, with an emphasis on the relational database model. Topics in relational database
systems include data modeling; the relational model; relational algebra; Structured Query
Language (SQL); and data quality, transactions, integrity and security. Students will also learn
approaches to building relational database application programs. Additional topics include
object-oriented and object-relational databases; semi-structured databases (such as XML); and
information retrieval. A database project is required. (Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or MATH200 or 1016-366) and (CSCI-142 or 4003-242 or 4003-334) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-331 
Introduction to Intelligent Systems
An introduction to the theories and algorithms used to create intelligent systems. Topics include
search algorithms (e.g. A*, iterative deepening), logic, planning, knowledge representation,
machine learning, and applications from areas such as computer vision, robotics, natural language processing, and expert systems. Programming assignments are an integral part of the
course. (Prerequisites: CSCI-261 or CSCI-264 and MATH-251 or equivalent courses.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-344 
Programming Language Concepts
This course is a study of the syntax and semantics of a diverse set of high-level programming
languages. The languages chosen are compared and contrasted in order to demonstrate general principles of programming language design and implementation. The course emphasizes
the concepts underpinning modern languages rather than the mastery of particular language
details. Programming projects will be required. (Prerequisites: CSCI-243 or SWEN-250 or
IGME-309 or 4003-334 or 4010-361 or 4080-487) and (MATH-190 or MATH-200) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-351 
Data Communications and Networks
This course is an in-depth study of data communications and networks. The course covers
design of, and algorithms and protocols used in, the physical, data link, network, transport,
and application layers in the Internet; methods for modeling and analyzing networks, including graphs, graph algorithms, and discrete event simulation; and an introduction to network
science. Programming projects will be required. (Prerequisites: (CSCI-251 or 4003-334) and
(MATH-251 or STAT-251) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSCI-352 
Operating Systems
An in-depth study of operating system concepts. Topics include process synchronization,
interprocess communication, deadlock, multiprogramming and multiprocessing, processor
scheduling and resource management, memory management, static and dynamic relocation,
virtual memory, file systems, logical and physical I/O, device allocation, I/O processor scheduling, process and resource protection. Programming projects involving the development of
or modification to operating system kernel features will be required. (Prerequisites: (CSCI-250
and CSCI-251) or (4003-334 and 4003-345) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSCI-420 
Principles of Data Mining
This course provides an introduction to the major concepts and techniques used in data mining of large databases. Topics include the knowledge discovery process; data exploration and
cleaning; data mining algorithms; and ethical issues underlying data preparation and mining.
Data mining projects, presentations, and a term paper are required. (Prerequisites: (CSCI-140
or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003-243) and (STAT-145 or MATH-251 or STAT-251) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSCI-431 
Introduction to Computer Vision
An introduction to the underlying concepts of computer vision. The course will consider fundamental topics, including image formation, edge detection, texture analysis, color, segmentation,
shape analysis, detection of objects in images and high level image representation. Depending
on the interest of the class, more advanced topics will be covered, such as image database
retrieval or robotic vision. Programming homework assignments that implement the concepts discussed in class are an integral part of the course. (Prerequisite: CSCI-331 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSCI-452 
Systems Programming
Application of operating system concepts to the design of hardware interfaces for a multiprogramming environment. Laboratory work includes the development of a multiprogramming
(optionally, multiprocessing) kernel with system call and interrupt handling facilities, and
the building of device drivers for a variety of peripheral devices. This course provides extensive experience with those aspects of systems programming that deal directly with the
hardware interface. A significant team programming project is a major component of this
course. (Prerequisites: CSCI-352 or (4003-334 and 4003-345) or equivalent courses.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

CSCI-453 
Computer Architecture
Computer Architecture is a study of the design of both modern and classic computer hardware. Topics include: a review of classical computer architectures; the design of operation
codes and addressing modes, data formats, and their implementation; internal and external
bus structures; architectural features to support virtual storage and page-replacement policies, high-level language features, and operating systems. Students will write programs which
simulate the organization of several different processor architectures to help further their
understanding of design choices. (Prerequisites: CSCI-352 or 4003-440 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSCI-455 
Principles of Computer Security
This course provides a broad introduction to the basic principles and practice of computer
security and emphasizes policies and mechanisms for building secure and trusted computer
systems. Topics include but are not limited to the following: security principles, policies and
mechanisms; cryptographic tools; user authentication and access control; secure systems and
networking; secure application development; secure data management; impact of mobile,
web and cloud computing; intrusion detection and prevention; auditing and forensics; privacy; security management and risk assessment; and legal and ethical aspects. Presentations
and projects will be required. (Prerequisites: CSCI-251 or 4003-420 or 4003-440 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSCI-462 
Introduction to Cryptography
This course provides an introduction to cryptography, its mathematical foundations, and its
relation to security. It covers classical cryptosystems, private-key cryptosystems (including DES
and AES), hashing and public-key cryptosystems (including RSA). The course also provides
an introduction to data integrity and authentication. (Prerequisites: (CSCI-243 or 4003-334)
and (MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1016-366) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-464 
Xtreme Theory
A fast paced, informal look at current trends in the theory of computing. Each week is dedicated to a different topic and will explore some of the underlying theory as well as the practical
applications of the theory. Sample topics may include: quantum cryptography, networks and
complex systems, social welfare and game theory, zero knowledge protocols. Students will
be evaluated on homework assignments and a final presentation. Offered every other year.
(Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or MATH-200) and (CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003243) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSCI-471 
Professional Communications
This course focuses on developing and improving verbal and written communication skills
specific to the discipline of computer science. Topics include the different forms of writing in
computer science (books, theses, journal articles, technical reports, manuscripts, etc.), writing
styles of computer scientists, document readability and usability, documents for career readiness, effective presentations, teamwork and peer review, research methods, experimentation,
documenting mathematics and algorithms, proper formatting of graphs, figures, and tables, and
ethical, social, and professional issues facing Computer Scientists. This course is approved as
Writing Intensive. (This class is restricted to students with at least 4th year standing COMPSCIBS or COMPSCI-2M) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSCI-488 
CS Undergraduate Summer Co-op
Students perform professional work related to Computer Science for which they are paid.
Students must complete a student co-op work report for each term for which they are registered; students are also evaluated each term by their employer. A satisfactory grade is given
for co-op when both a completed student co-op work report and a completed, corresponding
employer evaluation are received and when both documents are generally consistent. When
registered for co-op, students are considered by RIT to have full-time status. In order to register for co-op for summer term, we expect that students will work a minimum of 10 weeks and
work a minimum of 35 hours per week. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from
the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
CSCI-499 
Computer Science Undergraduate Co-op
Students perform professional work related to Computer Science for which they are paid.
Students work full time during the term for which they are registered. Students must complete a student co-op work report for each term for which they are registered; students are
also evaluated each term by their employer. A satisfactory grade is given for co-op when both
a completed student co-op work report and a completed, corresponding employer evaluation
are received and when both documents are generally consistent. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

25

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

CSCI-509 
Seminar in Computer Science
This course examines current topics in Computer Science. This is intended to allow faculty
to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites,
course topics, format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will be
determined by the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this area.
Specific course instances will be identified as belonging to no cluster; hence, such courses will
count only as general Computer Science electives. (Prerequisites: CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or
CSCI-242 or 4003-243 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3

CSCI-559 
Seminar in Systems
This course examines current topics in Systems. This is intended to allow faculty to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites, course seminar,
format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will be determined by
the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this area. Specific course
instances will be identified as belonging to the Distributed Systems cluster, the Architecture
and Operating Systems cluster, the Security cluster, or some combination of these three clusters. Lecture 3, Credits 3

CSCI-510 
Introduction to Computer Graphics
Introduction to Computer Graphics is a study of the hardware and software principles of
interactive raster graphics. Topics include an introduction to the basic concepts, 2-D and
3-D modeling and transformations, viewing transformations, projections, rendering techniques, graphical software packages and graphics systems. The course will focus on rasterization
techniques and emphasize the hardware rasterization pipeline including the use of hardware shaders. Students will use a standard computer graphics API to reinforce concepts and
study fundamental computer graphics algorithms. Programming projects will be required.
(Prerequisites: MATH-241 and ((CSCI-243 and CSCI-250) or 4003-334) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

CSCI-569 
Seminar in Theory
This course examines current topics in Theory. This is intended to allow faculty to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites, course seminar,
format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will be determined by
the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this area. Specific course
instances will be identified as belonging to the Theory cluster, the Security cluster, or both
clusters. Lecture 3, Credits 3

CSCI-519 
Seminar in Computer Graphics
This course examines current topics in Computer Graphics. This is intended to allow faculty
to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites,
course seminar, format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will
be determined by the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this
area. Specific course instances will be identified as belonging to the Computer Graphics and
Visualization cluster. Lecture 3, Credits 3

CSEC-099 
Cooperative Education Seminar
This course helps students prepare for co-operative education employment (“co-op”) by developing job search strategies and material. Students will explore current and emerging aspects of
the Computing Security field with employers, alumni and current students who have already
been on co-op. Students are introduced to RIT’s Office of Cooperative Education and Career
Services, and learn about professional and ethical responsibilities for their co-op and subsequent professional experiences. Students will work collaboratively to build résumés and to
prepare for interviews. (This course is restricted to INFOSEC-BS majors with at least 2nd year
student standing.) Lab 1, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

CSCI-529 
Seminar in Data Management
This course examines current topics in Data Management. This is intended to allow faculty
to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites,
course seminar, format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will
be determined by the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this area.
Specific course instances will be identified as belonging to the Data Management cluster, the
Security cluster, or both clusters. Lecture 3, Credits 3
CSCI-532 
Introduction to Intelligent Security Systems
The course will introduce students to the application of intelligent methodologies in computer
security and information assurance systems design. It will review different application areas
such as intrusion detection and monitoring systems, access control and biological authentication, firewall structure and design. The students will be required to implement a course project
on design of a particular security tool with an application of an artificial intelligence methodology and to undertake its performance analysis. (Prerequisites: CSCI-331 or CSCI-351 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSCI-539 
Seminar in Intelligent Systems
This course examines current topics in Intelligent Systems. This is intended to allow faculty
to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites,
course seminar, format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will
be determined by the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this area.
Specific course instances will be identified as belonging to the Intelligent Systems cluster, the
Computational Vision and Acoustics cluster, the Security cluster, or some combination of these
three clusters. (Prerequisites: (CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or ISTE-121 or IGME-106
or CPET-321 or 4003-243 or 4002-219 or 4080-223 or 0618-232) and MATH-251 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
CSCI-541 
Programming Skills
The goal of this course is to introduce the students to a programming paradigm and an appropriate programming language chosen from those that are currently important or that show
high promise of becoming important. A significant portion of the learning curve occurs through
programming assignments with exemplary solutions discussed later in class. The instructor
will post specifics prior to registration. With the approval of the program coordinator, the
course can be taken for credit more than once, provided each instance deals with a different
paradigm and language. (Prerequisites: CSCI-344 or (4003-450 and 1016-265) or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSCI-549 
Seminar in Languages and Tools
This course examines current topics in Languages and Tools. This is intended to allow faculty
to pilot potential new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as prerequisites,
course seminar, format, learning outcomes, assessment methods, and resource needs) will
be determined by the faculty member(s) who propose a specific seminar course in this area.
Specific course instances will be identified as belonging to the Languages and Tools cluster,
the Security cluster, or both clusters. Lecture 3, Credits 3

26	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

Computer Security

CSEC-101 
Fundamentals of Computing Security
An introduction to the fundamental issues, concepts and tools common to all areas of computing security. Topics include identifying attackers and their motivations. Essential techniques
will be introduced covering the areas of anti-virus, monitoring, virtual machines, account
control, and access rights management. Various security models will be investigated. Concept
areas such as confidentiality, integrity, availability and privacy will be studied. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSEC-362 
Cryptography and Authentication
As more users access remote systems, the job of identifying and authenticating those users at
distance becomes increasingly difficult. The growing impact of attackers on identification and
authentication systems puts additional strain on our ability to ensure that only authorized users
obtain access to controlled or critical resources. This course introduces encryption techniques
and their application to contemporary authentication methods. (Prerequisites: (CSEC-101 or
4050-220) and (MATH-131 or MATH-190 or 1055-265) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSEC-363 
Cyber Security Policy and Law
In this course, students will study the need for information security policies, procedures and
standards. Students will write security policies and examine cases used as precedent for current
laws. Other topics may include, but are not limited to, trust models, security policy design, incident response, and review of legal cases. (Prerequisites: (CSEC-101 or 4050-220) and CSEC-499
or equivalent courses and minimum 3rd year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSEC-461 
Computer System Security
This course will discuss the areas of liability, exposure, opportunity, ability and function of various weaknesses in computer security. The course will cover forms of attack and the methods
to detect and defend against them. The issues and facilities available to both the intruder and
administrator will be examined and evaluated with appropriate out-of-class laboratory exercises to illustrate their effect. (Prerequisites: CSEC-101 and NSSA 221 or equivalent courses.)
Lab, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSEC-462 
Network Security and Forensics
This course investigates the many facets of network security and forensics. Students will examine the areas of intrusion detection, evidence collection, network auditing, network security
policy design and implementation as well as preparation for and defense against attacks. The
issues and facilities available to both the intruder and data network administrator will be examined and evaluated with appropriate laboratory exercises to illustrate their effect. (Prerequisites:
(CSEC-101 and NSSA-242) or (4050-220 and 4050-413) or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

CSEC-466 
Introduction to Malware
Computer malware is a computer program with malicious intent. In this course, students will
study the history of computer malware, categorizations of malware such as computer viruses,
worms, Trojan horses, spyware, etc. Other topics include, but are not limited to, basic structures
and functions of malware, malware delivery mechanism, propagation models, anti-malware
software, its methods and applications, reverse engineering techniques. (Prerequisites: NSSA221 and CSEC-362 and CSEC-363 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-467 
Mobile Device Security and Forensics
This course will be an in-depth study of security, incident response, and forensics as applied
to the hardening and protection of mobile devices. Students will learn issues specific to the
security of and vulnerabilities of mobile devices as well as forensics tools and incident response
techniques used to reveal activities and information related to mobile devices. (Prerequisites:
NSSA-221 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-468 
Risk Management for Information Security
The three key elements of risk management will be introduced and explored. These are risk
analysis, risk assessment, and vulnerability assessment. Both quantitative and qualitative methodologies will be discussed as well as how security metrics can be modeled, monitored, and
controlled. Several case studies will be used to demonstrate the risk management principles
featured throughout the course. Students will work in teams to conduct risk assessments on
the selected case study scenarios. They will develop mitigation plans and present the results
of their analysis both in written reports and oral presentations. (Prerequisites: NSSA-221 or
equivalent course and at least 3rd year standing in INFOSEC-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-469 
Wireless Security
This course is designed to give the student an understanding of the theories and ideas regarding
802.11 network security. In addition, students will receive practical knowledge via hands on
experiences. Course topics cover the TCP/IP networking model and include modules such as
signal interception, basic 802.11 layer 2 security, ACLs, VPNs, encryption, authentication and
802.1x architectures. The course culminates in an attack/defend exercise in which teams determine the weaknesses of the surrounding networks while protecting their own. (Prerequisites:
NSSA-242 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-470 
Covert Communications
Covert communications have been employed in the past in traditional information warfare.
Today with huge amounts of digital information exchanged in our cyber space and covert communication will become a potential tool for information warfare inside the space. Students
will be introduced to the history, theory, methodology and implementation of various kinds
of covert communications. Students will explore future techniques and uses of covert communications. More specifically students will explore possible uses of covert communications
in the management of botnets. Students will conduct research in this topic area and will write
a research paper on their research. Students will be required to submit their paper for publication in a peer-reviewed venue. (This course is restricted to INFOSEC-BS students with 4th
year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-471 
Penetration Testing Frameworks and Methodologies
The process and methodologies employed in negotiating a contract, performing a penetration
test, and presenting the results will be examined and exercised. Students will be exposed to tools
and techniques employed in penetration testing. Assignments will explore the difficulties and
challenges in planning for and conducting an assessment exposing potential vulnerabilities.
Students will develop a metric used to evaluate the security posture of a given network and
will develop a coherent and comprehensive report of their findings to present to their client.
Particular attention will be paid to the ramifications of the findings toward the security of the
targets. (This course is restricted to students in INFOSEC-BS with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSEC-472 
Authentication and Security Models
As more users access remote systems, the job of identifying and authenticating those users at
distance becomes increasingly difficult. The growing impact of attackers on identification and
authentication systems puts additional strain on our ability to ensure that only authorized users
obtain access to controlled or critical resources. This course reviews basic cryptology techniques
and introduces their application to contemporary authentication methods. (Prerequisites:
CSCI-462 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSEC-473 
Cyber Defense Techniques
Students will study, build, defend and test the security of computer systems and networking
infrastructure while potentially under attack. Students will gain an understanding of standard
business operations, timelines and the value of risk and project management. Techniques as
related to security guidelines and goals will be studied. Aspects of legal requirements, inheriting existing infrastructure, techniques for backup and recovery of data and systems will be
examined. (This course is restricted to students in INFOSEC-BS with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

CSEC-474 
Unix-based System Forensics
This course is designed to provide students with the ability to identify and employ forensics
techniques for gathering, preserving and analyzing evidence on Unix-based systems, and to
report the pertinent evidence to the courts. The course emphasizes both the fundamental computer forensics procedures and the hands-on experience of utilizing forensics tools to uncover
pertinent evidence from memory, allocated and unallocated space, and other Unix artifacts
including log files, deleted files, browser history, emails, etc. Students will also follow and practice the forensically-sound procedures to ensure evidence admissibility in court. (Prerequisites:
NSSA-221 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSEC-475 
Windows System Forensics
This course is designed to provide students with the ability to identify and employ forensics techniques for gathering, preserving and analyzing evidence on Windows systems, and
to report the pertinent evidence to the courts. The course emphasizes both the fundamental
computer forensics procedures and the hands-on experience of utilizing the Windows forensics tools to uncover pertinent evidence from memory, allocated and unallocated space, and
other Windows artifacts including registry, recycle bin, Internet Explorer, emails, etc. Students
will also follow and practice the forensics-sound procedures to ensure evidence admissibility in court. (Prerequisites: NSSA-221 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-476 
Malware Reverse Engineering
This course provides an overview of basic concepts, techniques, and tools of malware reverse
engineering. Students will learn how to perform reverse engineering to discover hidden software functions and hidden network communication techniques and protocols. Students will
also learn techniques to protect against software reverse engineering. (Prerequisites: CSEC466 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSEC-477 
Disaster Recovery Planning and Business Continuity
Security and network professionals are increasingly being called upon to apply their knowledge
to the development of disaster recovery and business continuity plans. This course will explore
DRP/BC in depth using current tools and techniques. Business requirements will be analyzed
from the budget, business needs and risk management perspective. Experience gained from at
least one co-op is required. (This course is restricted to students in INFOSEC-BS with at least
3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSEC-478 
Advanced Mobile Device Forensics
This course will be an in-depth study of the forensics as applied to the hardening and protection of mobile devices. Students will learn the specifics of the advanced forensic techniques of
smartphones and the third-party apps that proliferate these pervasive devices. Additionally,
students will examine the various implementations of security in the various operating systems, devices and third-party apps. (Prerequisites: CSEC-467 or equivalent course.) Lab 2,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
CSEC-479 
Advanced Mobile Device Security
This course will introduce students to the advanced concepts, techniques, and tools of mobile
device security. Students will learn different security models, current malware, pen testing,
reverse engineering of mobile devices. Students will perform mobile device security of the most
popular operating systems in an effort to provide better security either within the device itself,
or through its wireless connections. Students will also learn about mobile malware and the
common practices of protection against mobile malware. (Prerequisites: CSEC-467 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CSEC-490 
Capstone in Computing Security
This is a capstone course for students in the information security and forensics program.
Students will apply knowledge and skills learned and work on real world projects in various
areas of computing security. Projects may require performing security analysis of systems,
networks, and software, etc., devising and implementing security solutions in real world applications. (This course is restricted to INFOSEC-BS students with 4th year standing.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CSEC-499 
Cooperative Education in CSEC
Students will gain experience and a better understanding of the application of technologies discussed in classes by working in the field of computing security. Students will be evaluated by
their employer. If a transfer student, they must have completed one term in residence at RIT
and be carrying a full academic load. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CSEC-559 
UG Sem in Computing Security
This course explores current topics in Computing Security. It is intended as a place holder
course for faculty to experiment new course offerings in Computing Security undergraduate
program. Course specific details change with respect to each specific focal area proposed by
faculty. Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 0 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

27

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

CSEC-599 
Independent Study in CSEC
Students will work with a supervising faculty member on a project of mutual interest. Project
design and evaluation will be determined through discussion with the supervising faculty member and documented through completion of an independent study form to be filed with the
Department of Computing Security. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ISTE-140 
Web and Mobile I
This course provides students with an introduction to Internet and Web technologies, and to
development on Macintosh/UNIX computer platforms. Topics include Internet transport protocols and security methods, XHTML and CSS, , multimedia, Web page design and Web site
publishing. Emphasis is placed on fundamentals, concepts and standards. Additional topics
include the user experience, mobile design issues, and copyright/intellectual property considerations. Exercises and projects are required. Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Information Sciences and Technologies

ISTE-151H 
Honors Seminar
This course focuses on Maps, Mapping and Geographic Experience. Students will gain handson experience with technologies such as Global Positioning Systems (GPSs), Geographic
Information Systems (GISs), remote sensing, mobile device mapping applications and mapbased games. Through active, hands on, experiential learning, students will learn how to use
GIS & T to create geographical experiences. GIS & T is a support mechanism for spatially-oriented thinking, reasoning, literacy, and problem-solving. Such problems include international
disaster management, climate change, and sustainable development. This honors seminar is a
foundational course that examines how our social worlds are linked to our physical, technological and material worlds. The corresponding emphasis on inquiry, analysis, and interpretation
facilitates student-engaged learning. In exploring pertinent issues/topics through an experiential, active, and site-specific curricular focused learning, various aspects of the human condition
are discovered. The honors seminar integrates the required YearOne curriculum. (This class
is restricted to students in the Honors Program and students with 1st year student standing.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

ISTE-099 
IST Second Year Seminar
This course helps students prepare for co-operative employment (“co-op”) by developing job
search approaches and material. Students will explore current and emerging aspects of IST fields
to help focus their skill development strategies. Students are introduced to the Office of Career
Services and Co-op Education, and learn about their professional and ethical responsibilities
for their co-op and subsequent professional experiences. Students will work collaboratively
to build résumés, cover letters, and prepare for interviewing. (This course is restricted to 2nd
year students in the INFOTEC-BS or ANSA-BS or MEDINFO-programs.) Lecture 1, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-100 
Computational Problem Solving in the Network Domain-I
A first course in using the object-oriented approach in the network domain. Students will
learn to design software solutions using the object-oriented approach, to implement software
solutions using a contemporary programming language, and to test these software solutions.
Topics include thinking in object-oriented terms, problem definition, designing solutions using
the object-oriented approach, implementing solutions using a contemporary programming
language, and testing software solutions. Programming projects will be required. Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-101 
Computational Problem Solving in the Network Domain-II
A second course in object-oriented problem solving in the network domain. Students will
learn to develop software for the applications layer of the protocol stack. Topics include data
structures, network processes, network protocols, and network security. Programming projects will be required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-100 or ISTE-202 or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-105 
Web Foundations
A hands-on introduction to Internet and web foundations for non-computing majors. Includes
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) and CSS (Cascading Stylesheets), web page design fundamentals, basic digital image manipulation, and web site implementation and maintenance.
Students will design and build their own web sites using the latest technologies and deploy them
to the web for world-wide access. (This class is restricted to non-computing majors. Students in
GCCIS are not eligible to take this course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ISTE-110 
FYW: Ethics in Computing
Computing and the Internet are now integral parts of our lives. In this course, we consider and
discuss how ethical theories and principles can inform and provide guidance about interactions and uses of computing technologies. Topics include the development interpretation, and
application of ethical theory, moral values, personal responsibility, codes of conduct, ethics in
the real and virtual worlds, intellectual property, and information security. This is a Writing
Intensive (WI) course. Students are provided with guidance and opportunities for improving
informal and formal writing skills. Grades received on writing assignments will constitute
a significant component of the final course grade. (Prerequisite: Student must have an SAT
Verbal Score greater than or equal to 560 or an ACT English Score of 23 or more or a Writing
Placement Exam score of 2 or higher.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-120 
Computational Problem Solving in the Information Domain I
A first course in using the object-oriented approach to solve problems in the information
domain. Students will learn to model hierarchical information structures using XML, to design
software solutions using the object-oriented approach, to visually model systems using UML, to
implement software solutions using a contemporary programming language, and to test these
software solutions. Additional topics include thinking in object-oriented terms, and problem
definition. Programming projects will be required. Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-121 
Computational Problem Solving in the Information Domain II
A second course in using the object-oriented approach to solving problems in the information
domain. Students will learn: basic design principles and guidelines for developing graphical
user interfaces, and use of the Event Model to implement graphical interfaces; algorithms for
processing data structures; multithreading concepts and use of the Multithreading Model to
design and implement advanced processing methods. Additional topics include the relational
model of information organization, and the Client-Server model. Individual implementation
projects are required. A team implementation exercise is used to provide students an opportunity to apply basic software development and project management practices in the context
of a medium-scale project. (Prerequisites: ISTE-120 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 6,
Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

28	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ISTE-190 
Foundations of Modern Information Processing
Computer-based information processing is a foundation of contemporary society. This course
provides an overview of modern information processing technologies, applications, practices
and trends. An emphasis is placed on how these technologies shape information environments and how participants in these environments are able to access, process, and use data
and information. Topics include computing system fundamentals, models for organizing data
and information, data exploration and knowledge discovery, Internet and the Web, social computing, information security and privacy, and current trends and futures. Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-200 
Java for Programmers
An intensive review of object-oriented design and the Java programming language for students
with prior programming background. This course covers the creation of application programs
using Java. Topics include: Java and the Java environment, object-oriented design, GUI interfaces, exception handling, threads, and the client/server environment. Programming projects
will be required. To be successful in this course, students will have already taken a two-course
object-oriented programming sequence. Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-202 
C++ for Programmers
Introductory application programming with a network-centric nature will be explored. Topics
covered include: C++ syntax, pointers, file handling, memory management, and object-oriented programming. Emphasis is on the development of problem-solving skills. Moderately
sized programming assignments are required. Prior programming experience (two-course
objected-oriented) is required. Students should have a two-course object-oriented programming sequence or equivalent such as ISTE-120 and ISTE-121 to be successful in this course.
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-205 
Digital Image Creation
This course explores the creation and manipulation of digital images intended for use on the
Web. Topics include basics of digital photography, acquisition of images, intermediate image
manipulation, image compression, and intellectual property issues. Students will be provided
with digital cameras for use in the course. (Preequisites: ISTE-105 or ISTE-140 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
ISTE-206 
Digital Video Creation
This course explores the creation of digital video intended for use on the Web. Topics include
basics of digital videography, acquisition of audio, editing, streaming, compression, as well as
storytelling with video and integration into web sites and applications. Students will be provided
with digital cameras for use in the course. (Preequisites: ISTE-105 or ISTE-140 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
ISTE-230 
Introduction to Database and Data Modeling
A presentation of the fundamental concepts and theories used in organizing and structuring
data. Coverage includes the data modeling process, basic relational model, normalization theory, relational algebra, and mapping a data model into a database schema. Structured Query
Language is used to illustrate the translation of a data model to physical data organization.
Modeling and programming assignments will be required. Note: students should have one
course in object-oriented programming. (Prerequisites: ISTE-120 or IGME-101 or IGME-105
or CSCI-142 or equivlanet course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

ISTE-240 
Web and Mobile II
This course builds on the basics of web page development that are presented in Web & Mobile
I and extends that knowledge to focus on theories, issues, and technologies related to the
design and development of web sites. An overview of web design concepts, including usability, accessibility, information architecture, and graphic design in the context of the web will
be covered. Introduction to web site technologies, including HTTP, web client and server programming, and dynamic page generation from a database also will be explored. Development
exercises are required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-120 and ISTE-140 or equivalent course) Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-252 
Foundations of Mobile Design
This course is an introduction to designing, prototyping, and creating applications and Web
Apps for mobile devices. These devices include a unique set of hardware and communications capabilities, incorporate novel interfaces, are location aware, and provide persistent
connectivity. Topics covered include user interaction patterns, connectivity, interface design,
software design patterns, and application architectures. Programming projects are required.
(Preerequisites: ISTE-240 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-260 
Designing the User Experience
The user experience is an important design element in the development of interactive systems.
This course presents the foundations of user-centered design principles within the context
of human-computer interaction (HCI). Students will explore and practice HCI methods that
span the development lifecycle from requirements analysis and creating the product/service
vision through system prototyping and usability testing. Leading edge interface technologies
are examined. Group-based exercises and design projects are required. (Prerequisites: ISTE140 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-264 
Prototyping and Usability Testing
This course will explore how modern human centered computing design and evaluation methodologies can be effectively used to create high-quality and usable technologies for a variety
of users. Students will learn how an initial design can be evaluated and improved through the
use of prototyping and user evaluations. Students will investigate a variety of high- and lowfidelity prototyping techniques, plan an iterative design process for an application, conduct
an evaluation of a prototype, and analyze the results of user testing to drive a design process. Programming is required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-262 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-266 
Design for Accessibility
This course will explore the design, evaluation, and use of computing and information technologies to benefit people with disabilities and older adults. Students will learn how to analyze
the accessibility of existing software or websites, and they will learn how to design technology
that can be effectively, enjoyably, and efficiently used by people with diverse sensory, motor,
and cognitive abilities. Students will learn about cutting-edge ways in which science and technology has provided assistance and accessibility for people with disabilities. Students will learn
how to investigate the needs of users with disabilities, design technologies according to universal design or accessibility principles, interpret key accessibility regulations and guidelines, and
include people with disabilities in the design and evaluation of new technologies. Programming
is required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-264 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-270 
Data Exploration and Knowledge Discovery
Rapidly expanding volumes of data from all areas of society are becoming available in digital
form. High value information and knowledge is embedded in many of these data volumes.
Unlocking this information can provide many benefits, and may also raise ethical questions in
certain circumstances. This course provides students with a gentle, hands-on introduction to
how interactive data exploration and data mining software can be used for data-driven knowledge discovery. Students will use statistical, visual, and data/text mining software systems
to explore data collections from several different domains such as business, environmental
management, healthcare, finance, and transportation. (Prerequisites: STAT-145 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-271 
Introduction To Informatics
This course introduces students to the world of Informatics and provides them with tools to
begin working as an informatician. Students learn the breadth of informatics and the roles
informaticians play. Tools for working with XML and spreadsheets are presented. The course
utilizes extensive hands-on computing, but no programming experience is necessary. (This
class is restricted to non-computing majors. Students in GCCIS are not eligible to take this
course.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Fall)

ISTE-330 
Database Connectivity and Access
In this course, students will build applications that interact with databases. Through programming exercises, students will work with multiple databases and programmatically invoke the
advanced database processing operations that are integral to contemporary computing applications. Topics include the database drivers, the data layer, connectivity operations, security
and integrity, and controlling database access. (Prerequisites: ISTE-230 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-340 
Client Programming
This course will explore the analysis, design, development, and implementation of client-side
programming in the context of Internet technologies, mobile devices, Web-based client systems
and desktop applications. Students will learn to design and build usable and effective interactive systems, clients, and interfaces. Key features addressed will include browser and platform
compatibility, object reusability, bandwidth and communications issues, development environments, privacy and security, and related technologies and APIs. Programming is required.
(Preerequisites: ISTE-240 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-341 
Server Programming
This course provides in-depth work in server-side programming. Students will develop
dynamic, data centric web pages and systems, and server-side information services that will
be available to clients implemented in a variety of software technologies. Topics include XML
parsing, generation, and consumption; web configuration and security; design patterns; web
service structures, and application security. Programming projects are required. (Prerequisites:
SWEN-383 and ISTE-340 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-358 
Foundations of Wearable and Ubiquitous Computing
Wearable technologies, like smart watches, and ubiquitous computing technologies, including
the internet of things, are entering the mainstream. In this introductory course, students will
learn the history of research in these areas and fundamentals of developing for these devices,
including interface design, networking, physical form factors; societal issues such as privacy
will also be discussed. This class is primarily project-based. (Prerequisites: ISTE-341 and ISTE252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-362 
Access and Assistive Technology
Students will gain hands-on experience and knowledge about a wide variety of accessibility
and assistive technology available for people with disabilities. Students will understand the
design principles underlying this technology and how the features and capabilities of assistive technology can be tailored to a particular individual’s needs and capabilities. Students
will learn about how new technologies and research in accessibility can be made available for
users, and they will learn how to design websites and software that work effectively with a
user’s own technology. Specific technologies discussed in the course may include, e.g.: alternative input devices, communication devices, and screen readers and magnifiers for people with
visual impairments. Programming is required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-266 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-371 
Integration in Informatics
This course is the capstone for the Applied Informatics Minor. Students will use mashup
tools along with their programming and database skills to develop a project, based on their
major’s domain, which demonstrates the work of an informatician. The course utilizes extensive hands-on computing, including programming and database work. (This class is restricted
to non-computing majors. Students in GCCIS are not eligible to take this course.) Lecture/
Lab 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
ISTE-382 
Introduction to Geospatial Technologies
This course provides a survey of underlying concepts and technologies used to represent and
understand the earth, collectively referred to as Geospatial Technologies (GTs). Students will
gain hands-on experience with GTs, including Global Positioning Systems (GPSs), Geographic
Information Systems (GISs), remote sensing, Virtual Globes, and Web mapping mashups.
Students also will develop basic spatial thinking, reasoning, problem solving and literacy skills.
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-384 
Introduction to Geographic Information Systems
This course introduces students to Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Course lectures,
reading assignments, and practical lab experiences will cover a mix of conceptual, practical and
technical GIS topics. Topics include GIS data models, basic cartography, geodatabases, spatial data acquisition and creation, spatial analysis, and GIS software operation. (Prerequisites:
ISTE-382 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

ISTE-305 
Rapid Online Presence
Although large-scale web sites still require considerable development effort, there are today
several options for establishing a web presence using tools designed for non-programmers.
This course gives students understanding of and experience with installing and customizing web sites using tools such as Blogs, Wikis, Content Management Systems, and Web Site
Toolkits. (Preequisites: ISTE-105 or ISTE-140 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

29

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

ISTE-386 
Geographic Information Systems Programming
Any serious interest in Geographic Information System (GIS) beyond the “out-of-the-box”
capabilities of standard commercial GIS software such as ESRI’s ArcGIS platform requires
knowledge of how to program a GIS. Knowledge of how to program a GIS extends the capabilities and possibilities of GIS in numerous scientific, technical, and applied dimensions not
possible with “out-of-the-box” GIS capabilities. This course is targeted to students with a serious interest in GIS who wish to apply previously learned object oriented programming concepts
within the context of Geographic Information System (GIS) application development across a
variety of environments. (Prerequisites: ISTE-382 and (ISTE-100 or ISTE-120) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-392 
Fundamentals of Instructional Technology
Instructional Technology encompasses the basic processes for developing and delivering instruction. Instructional Systems Design (ISD) is a well-established methodology for
describing knowledge and skills and developing instructional systems to effectively conveying knowledge. This course enables the student to be able to plan, organize, and systematically
develop instructional materials. The course uses an ISD model to analyze, design, deliver, and
evaluate instruction. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-394 
Interactive Courseware
Computer software that teaches is referred to as courseware. This course is a continuation of
Fundamentals of Instruction Technology (ISTE-392), and serves as a transition from general
instructional design principles to the actual application of these principles in a computer-based
environment. Although the basic principles of instructional design hold true in all media environments, using these teaching and learning principles is somewhat different when developing
instruction that will be delivered by computer. This course teaches procedures that already
have been successful in the design and development of courseware. (Prerequisites: ISTE-121
and ISTE-392 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-405 
Web Integration and Application
The final course in the minor in Web Design and Development (for non-GCCIS majors).
Students will develop a deeper understanding of technologies underlying the web and how to
combine them. This course builds upon the work from the preceding four courses in the minor
and emphasizes integrating multiple technologies and content sources to create sophisticated
web sites and web applications for desktop and mobile devices. This course is not available
to GCCIS majors. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to students whose major is outside of
GCCIS and have completed ISTE-105 and ISTE-205 and ISTE-206 and ISTE-305 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-422 
Application Development Practices
In this course, students will gain experience with the processes, practices, and tools professional developers use to deliver robust and maintainable applications. Students will apply these
practices and tools to build smaller-scale production-quality applications and systems. Topics
include development life cycles, version control, test bed development and use, build utilities,
error handling, deployment tools, and documentation. (Prerequsites: Completion of one of
the following programming courses is required: ISTE-101, ISTE-121 or equivalent, ISTE-200,
ISTE-202, IGME-102, IGME-106, 4080-223, 4080-231, CSCI-142, CSCI-242, CSCI-243, 4003243 or 4003-334.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-424 
Distributed Application Systems Development
Program code and functionality of larger-scale systems are typically distributed across multiple servers. In this course, students will work with messaging middleware and enterprise
development frameworks typically used in industry. Programming projects will be required.
(Prerequisites: ISTE-341 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-430 
Information Requirements Modeling
Students will survey and apply contemporary techniques used in analyzing and modeling
information requirements. Requirements will be elicited in a variety of domains and abstracted at conceptual, logical, and physical levels of detail. Process, data, and state modeling will
be applied in projects that follow a systems development lifecycle. Object-oriented modeling will be explored and contrasted with data and process oriented modeling. Individual and
team modeling assignments will be required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-230 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-432 
Database Application Development
Database applications have aspects that need to be considered when designing and developing
larger-scale systems. In this course students will explore topics such as concurrent processing,
scalability, performance, and security within the context of developing larger-scale data/base
information processing systems. Programming projects are required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-330
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

30	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ISTE-434 
Data Warehousing
This course covers the purpose, scope, capabilities, and processes used in data warehousing technologies for the management and analysis of data. Students will be introduced to the
theory of data warehousing, dimensional data modeling, the extract/transform/load process,
warehouse implementation, and summary-data management. The basics of data mining and
importance of data security will also be discussed. Hands-on exercises include implementing a
small-scale data warehouse. (Prerequisites: ISTE-230 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-436 
Database Management and Access
Students will be introduced to issues in client/server database implementation and administration. Students will configure, test, and establish client-server communication and server-server
communication with single and multiple database servers. Topics such as schema implementation, storage allocation and management, user creation and access security, backup and
recovery, and performance measurement and enhancement will be presented in lecture and
experienced in a laboratory environment. Students will configure and demonstrate successful
communication between a database file server and multiple clients. (Prerequisites: ISTE-330
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-438 
Contemporary Databases
This course will introduce the topic of contemporary databases by covering the design, application and use of non-relational (NoSQL) database technologies. Topics include an overview
of data types, structuring and processing data and knowledge, data transformation, and data
storage and warehousing. Students will learn the interaction between relational and nonrelational databases in the Cloud or other storage media. Programming assignments will be
required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-230 and ISTE-240 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
ISTE-442 
Web Application Development
When building larger-scale web applications, there are a myriad of concerns that range from
technology, framework, and architecture selection to runtime performance optimization. This
course focuses on the development of integrated web applications that consume information
served from one or many sources. Trends in web application development are identified and
assessed. Programming projects are required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-341 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-444 
Web Server Development and Administration
Web developers often need to go beyond building web pages and client-server programming
to plan, install, configure, develop, and maintain the Web servers that host their sites. They
need to understand issues of scalability, performance, and security as they apply to deploying
a web presence. This course provides a practical hands-on approach to development, configuration, and administration of Web server platforms. Topics include issues of and approaches
to scalability, multiple server systems, security, and auditing, as well as the many configuration options, modules, and server alternatives available. (Prerequisites: ISTE-341 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-454 
Mobile Application Development I
This course extends the material covered in the Foundations of Mobile Design course and
provides students with experience writing native applications for mobile devices such as
Smartphone¹s in one of the current major platforms. These devices are exceptionally portable,
have unique sets of hardware and communications capabilities, incorporate novel interfaces,
are location aware, and provide persistent connectivity. Students are encouraged to make use
of these unique characteristics and operating properties to develop innovative applications.
Programming projects are required. (Prerequisite: ISTE-252 and ISTE-340 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-456 
Mobile Application Development II
This course extends the Mobile Application Development I experience and provides students with experience writing native and hybrid applications for mobile devices such as
Smartphone¹s in one or more of the current major platforms not covered in prior courses. In
addition, this course will include advanced concepts not previously covered. Programming
projects are required. (Prerequisite: ISTE-252 and ISTE-340 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-458 
Advanced Topics in Wearable and Ubiquitous Computing
This course is a sequel to ISTE-358, Foundations of Wearable & Ubiquitous Computing. In this
advanced course, students will further their understanding of these technologies and what they
can do. A major emphasis will be on context and activity recognition; for example, automatically
understanding what a person is doing or whom they are with. This class is primarily project-based. (Prerequisites: ISTE-358 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

ISTE-462 
Research in Accessibility
Students will dive into cutting edge research in the field of computer accessibility and assistive technology; they will read, present, and discuss research literature from major conferences
and journals in the field. Students will learn about recent developments and ongoing research
efforts in accessibility, and they will learn how to synthesize the results from research publications. Students will learn how to identify high quality research and how to critique this work to
identify areas for improvement or future research directions. Students will learn the elements
of a high-quality research publication, and they will explore and gain expertise in a particular
topic in the field of accessibility in depth. (Prerequisites: ISTE-266 and PSYC-251 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-464 
Accessibility Through the Lifespan
Students will explore how accessibility and assistive technologies intersect with aging throughout the lifespan, with a particular focus on the early and later stages of human development,
including: educational contexts (for children or young adults) and effective design strategies
for promoting accessibility for older adults with diverse capabilities. Students will learn key
legal regulations that govern special education and accessibility in educational contexts, including the provision of assistive technologies and the accessibility of instructional technologies.
Students will also explore typical changes in ability and impairments that relate to the human
aging process, and they will investigate how to design usable and engaging technology for the
growing population of older adults. Students will come to understand the concepts and needs
of younger and older users firsthand through, e.g., guest speakers or personal interactions.
(Prerequisites: ISTE-266 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 0 (Spring)
ISTE-472 
Text Analytics
This course covers fundamental concepts and technologies for the management and analysis of
unstructured textual data. Topics include encoding, indexing, preprocessing, storing, searching, processing, and presenting textual information using fully automatic systems. Analytic
techniques, such as categorization and clustering, and link analysis, are introduced that allow
students to process and analyze textual data, discover patterns and knowledge, and interpret the results. Students use text analytics existing APIs and tools to design experiments for
exploring the behavior of basic text analytic techniques. (Prerequisites: ISTE-121 and ISTE230 and MATH-131 and STAT-146 or equivalent courses and minimum of 3rd year standing.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-474 
Social and Web Analytics
From the social computing perspective, user interactions create user-generated content.
Examples of user-generated content include blogs and wikis, reports of location, activity, plans
and schedules, and patterns of interaction. This course will provide students with the knowledge and tools to extract information from user-generated content and to use this information
to build user-centric applications with high degrees of personalization. Through development
projects, students will gain experience using social network APIs and with developing socialoriented mashups. Security and privacy concerns are emphasized. (Prerequisites: ISTE-341
and ISTE-472 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-476 
Visual Analytics
This course introduces students to Visual Analytics, or the science of analytical reasoning
facilitated by interactive visual interfaces. Course lectures, reading assignments, and practical
lab experiences will cover a mix of conceptual, practical and technical Visual Analytics topics.
Topics include analytical reasoning, human cognition and perception of visual information,
visual representation and interaction technologies, data representation and transformation,
production, presentation, and dissemination of analytic process results, and Visual Analytic
case studies and applications. (Prerequisites: ISTE-260 and ISTE-472 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-482 
Geospatial Data Analysis
This course is an introduction to the theory and techniques used for spatial analysis of complex,
geographically referenced data. Topics include spatial data analysis and statistical techniques
for a variety of problem types that span a broad spectrum of disciplines. In-class and out-ofclass assignments will develop students spatial data analysis skills. (Prerequisites: ISTE-384
and STAT-146 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-483 
Information Science and Technology Research
This course is for students enrolled in the BS IT degree program and minors to demonstrate
competence in concepts, techniques and applications via a semester-length research project
developed in conjunction with a faculty member and based on the student’s degree concentration or minor. With instructor guidance, students will learn how to formulate a research
question, choose relevant methods to answer the question, execute the project and present
results in a public forum. (This class is restricted to degree seeking students with at least 4th
year level.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

ISTE-484 
Thematic Cartography and Geographic Visualization
This course examines concepts and techniques associated with dynamic map construction,
usage, and assessment. Specific topics include thematic cartography, geographic information
visualization, sources of dynamic geographic information, developing animated and interactive maps, mapping mashup development, using maps as a means to support group work,
usability of dynamic maps, and current geovisualization research areas. Development of a
visualization prototype and an associated research project in an area related to thematic cartography and geographic visualization are required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-386 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISTE-490 Futuring
This course teaches students to evaluate and exploit emerging technologies through the use of
futuring techniques in the areas of society, technology, politics, and economics. Techniques
include Delphi, modeling, regression models, and scanning. Students also are introduced to an
innovation life cycle, describing the origination points of technology, and will discuss diffusion
of innovation. Consequences of technology are discussed and modeled and used as a means to
evaluate technologies. Some programming is required. (Prerequisites: (ISTE-100 or ISTE-120
or ISTE-200 or ISTE-202) and STAT-146 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISTE-499 
Undergraduate Co-op
Students perform paid, professional work related to their program of study. Students work
full-time during the term they are registered for co-op. Students must complete a student
co-op work report for each term they are registered; students also are evaluated each term by
their employer. A satisfactory grade is given for co-op when both a completed student co-op
report and a corresponding employer report that indicates satisfactory student performance
are received. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ISTE-500 
Senior Development Project I
The first course in a two-course, senior level, system development capstone project. Students
form project teams and work with sponsors to define system requirements. Teams then create
architectures and designs, and depending on the project, also may begin software development. Requirements elicitation and development practices introduced in prior coursework
are reviewed, and additional methods and processes are introduced. Student teams are given considerable latitude in how they organize and conduct project work. (Prerequisites: The
completion of 2 co-ops is required.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-501 
Senior Development Project II
The second course in a two-course, senior level, system development capstone project. Student
teams complete development of their system project and package the software and documentation for deployment. Usability testing practices introduced in prior coursework are reviewed,
and additional methods and processes are introduced. Teams present their developed system
and discuss lessons learned at the completion of the course. (Prerequisites: ISTE-500 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISTE-590 
Information Technology Seminar
This course explores emerging topics in Information Technology. The faculty member(s) who
offer an Information Technology seminar course determine specific course parameters such
as prerequisites, format, learning outcomes, and assessment methods. Lecture/Lab 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Interactive Games and Media
IGME-099 
Co-op Preparation Workshop
This course helps students prepare for co-operative education employment (“co-op”) by developing job search strategies and material. Students will explore current and emerging aspects
of IGM fields to help focus their skill development strategies. Students are introduced to RIT’s
Office of Cooperative Education and Career Services, and learn about professional and ethical
responsibilities for their co-op and subsequent professional experiences. Students will work
collaboratively to build résumés and digital portfolios, and to prepare for interview situations.
(NWMEDID-BS, GAMEDES-BS YR 2-5) Lecture 1, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-101 
New Media Interactive Design and Algorithmic Problem Solving I
This course provides students with an introduction to problem solving, abstraction, and algorithmic thinking that is relevant across the field of new media. Students are introduced to
object-oriented design methodologies through the creation of event-driven, media-intensive
applications. Students will explore the development of software through the use of a range of
algorithmic concepts related to the creation of applications by writing classes that employ the
fundamental structures of computing, such as conditionals, loops, variables, data types, functions, and parameters. There is an early emphasis on object oriented concepts and design.
(This course is restricted to 1st-3rd year level students in NWMEDID-BS and NMDE-BFA.)
Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

31

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

IGME-102 
New Media Interactive Design and Algorithmic Problem Solving II
This course provides students a continued introduction to problem solving, abstraction, and
algorithmic thinking that is relevant across the field of new media. As the second course in
programming for New Media students, this course continues an object-oriented approach to
programming for creative practice. Topics will include re-usability, data structures, rich media
types, event-driven programming, loaders, XML, object design and inheritance. Emphasis is
placed on the development of problem-solving skills as students develop moderately complex
applications. (Prerequisites: C- or better in IGME-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 6,
Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-105 
Game Development and Algorithmic Problem Solving I
This course introduces students within the domain of game design and development to the
fundamentals of computing through problem solving, abstraction, and algorithmic design.
Students will learn the basic elements of game software development, including problem
decomposition, the design and implementation of game applications, and the testing/debugging of their designs. (This course is restricted to 1st - 3rd year students in GAMEDES-BS.)
Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-106 
Game Development and Algorithmic Problem Solving II
This course furthers the exploration of problem solving, abstraction, and algorithmic design.
Students apply the object-oriented paradigm of software development, with emphasis upon
fundamental concepts of encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism. In addition, object
structures and class relationships comprise a key portion of the analytical process including
the exploration of problem structure and refactoring. Intermediate concepts in software design
including GUIs, threads, events, networking, and advanced APIs are also explored. Students
are also introduced to data structures, algorithms, exception handling and design patterns
that are relevant to the construction of game systems. (Prerequisites: C- or better in IGME105 or equivalent course and student standing in the GAMEDES-BS program.) Lecture/Lab
6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-110 
Introduction to Interactive Media
This course provides an overview of media in historical, current and future contexts.
Incorporating lectures and discussion with hands on work involving written and interactive
media assets, students examine the role of written and visual media from theoretical as well as
practical perspectives. The course also provides an introduction to interactive media development techniques, including digital media components and delivery environments. Students
will be required to write formal analysis and critique papers along with digital modes of writing including collaborative editing and effective presentation design. (This course is restricted
to 1st - 3rd year students in NWMEDID-BS and GAMEDES-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
IGME-119 
2D Animation and Asset Production
This course provides a theoretical framework covering the principles of animation and its use
in game design to affect user experience. Emphasis will be placed upon principles that support
character development and animations that show cause and effect. Students will apply these
principles to create animations that reflect movement and character appropriate for different
uses and environments. (Prerequisites: IGME-110 or 4002-320 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-151H 
Honors Seminar
This honors seminar is a foundational course that examines how our social worlds are linked
to our physical, technological and material worlds. The corresponding emphasis on inquiry,
analysis, and interpretation facilitates student-engaged learning. In exploring pertinent issues/
topics through an experiential, active, and site-specific curricular focused learning, various
aspects of the human condition are discovered. The honors seminar integrates the required
Year One curriculum. (This class is restricted to students in the Honors program.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IGME-201 
New Media Interactive Design and Algorithmic Problem Solving III
This is the third course in the software development sequence for New Media Interactive
Development students. Students further their exploration of problem solving and abstraction
through coverage of topics such as GUI development, events, file I/O, networking, threading,
and other advanced topics related to the design and development of modern dynamic applications. Programming assignments are an integral part of the course. (Prerequisites: C- or
better in IGME-102 or equivalent course and student standing in NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-202 
Interactive Media Development
In this course, students will learn to create visually rich interactive experiences. It is a course
in programming graphics and media, but it is also a course on the relationship between ideas
and code. Students will explore topics in math and physics by building programs that simulate
and visualize processes in the natural world. Assignments will include major programming
projects, such as building a virtual world inhabited by digital creatures that display observable
behaviors. (Prerequisites: C- or better in IGME-106 or IGME-201 and MATH-185 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

32	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

IGME-209 
Data Structures and Algorithms for Games and Simulations I
This course focuses upon the application of data structures, algorithms, and fundamental
Newtonian physics to the development of video game applications, entertainment software
titles, and simulations. Topics covered include 3D coordinate systems and the implementation
of affine transformations, geometric primitives, and efficient data structures and algorithms for
real-time collision detection. Furthermore, Newtonian mechanics principles will be examined
in the context of developing game and entertainment software where they will be applied to
compute the position, velocity and acceleration of a point-mass subject to forces and the conservation of momentum and energy. Programming assignments are a required part of this course.
(Prerequisites: IGME-202 and (PHYS-111 or 1017-211 or 1017-311or PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A
or (PHYS-206 and PHYS-208)) and (MATH-185 or 1016-228 or 1016-281) or equivalent courses
and student standing in GAMEDES-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-219 
3D Animation and Asset Production
This course provides an overview of 3D game asset production. Basic ideas learned within the
first asset production course are also revisited within the 3D environs. Topics covered include
modeling, texturing, skinning and animation. Emphasis is put on low polygon modeling techniques, best practices in game art production, and effective communication strategies between
artists, programmers and designers. (Prerequisites: IGME-119 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-220 
Game Design and Development I
This course examines the core process of game design, from ideation and structured brainstorming in an entertainment technology context through the examination of industry standard
processes and techniques for documenting and managing the design process. This course specifically examines techniques for assessing and quantifying the validity of a given design, for
managing innovation and creativity in a game development-specific context, and for world
and character design. Specific emphasis is placed on both the examination and deconstruction of historical successes and failures, along with presentation of ethical and cultural issues
related to the design and development of interactive software and the role of individuals in
a team-oriented design methodology. Students in this class are expected to actively participate and engage in the culture of design and critique as it relates to the field. (Prerequisites:
(IGME-202 and student standing in GAMEDES-BS) or (4080-230 and 4080-334 and student
standing in NWMEDID-BS) or equivalents.Prerequisites: (IGME-202 and student standing in
GAMEDES-BS) or (4080-230 and 4080-334 and student standing in NWMEDID-BS) or equivalents.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-230 
Website Design and Implementation
This course provides an introduction to web development tools and technologies, such as X/
HTML, CSS, Javascript and DHTML, AJAX, web platforms and environments, and server-side
programming methods. (Prerequisites: (IGME-102 or IGME-106) and IGME-110 and student
standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS or IGME-101 and at least 2nd year student standing in NMDE-BFA.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-236 
Interaction, Immersion, and the Media Interface
This course examines the concepts of interface and interaction models in a media-specific context, with particular emphasis on the concept of the immersive interface. This course explores
concepts such as perception, expectation, Gestalt Theory, interactivity, Semiotics, presence,
and immersion in the context of media application development and deployment. In addition,
underlying concepts of cognitive psychology and cognitive science will be integrated where
appropriate. These theories are then integrated in the exploration of the immersive interface,
and with related concepts such as user-level-interface modification, augmentation of identity,
and the interface as a social catalyst. (Prerequisites: (IGME-102 or IGME-106) and IGME-110
or equivalent courses and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-309 
Data Structures and Algorithms for Games and Simulations II
This course continues the investigation into the application of data structures, algorithms, and
fundamental Newtonian mechanics required for the development of video game applications,
simulations, and entertainment software titles. Topics covered include quaternion representation of orientation and displacement, cubic curves and surfaces, classifiers, recursive generation
of geometric structures, texture mapping, and the implementation of algorithms within game
physics engines for collision detection and collision resolution of rigid bodies, and the numerical
integration of the equations of motion. In addition, advanced data structures such as B+ trees
and graphs will be investigated from the context of game application and entertainment software development. Programming assignments are a requirement for this course. (Prerequisites:
IGME-209 and (MATH-186 or MATH-181 or MATH-181A) or equivalent courses and student
standing in GAMEDES-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

IGME-320 
Game Design and Development II
This course continues to examine the core theories of game design as they relate to the professional field. Beginning with a formalized pitch process, this course examines the design and
development paradigm from story-boarding and pre-visualization through rapid iteration,
refinement, and structured prototyping exercises to further examine the validity of a given
design. Specific emphasis is placed on iterative prototyping models, and on methodologies
for both informal and formal critique. This course also explores production techniques and
life-cycle in the professional industry. (Prerequisites: IGME-220 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-330 
Rich Media Web Application Development I
This course provides students the opportunity to explore the design and development of Media
Rich Internet Applications (MRIAs). This course moves beyond client and server side web
development, and explores issues of presentation, interactivity, persistence, and extensibility
common among such applications. Specifically, items explored include framework characteristics, data management, persistence, data binding, information manipulation, as well as
data presentation. (Prerequisites: IGME-230 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-430 
Rich Media Web Application Development II
This course provides students the opportunity to continue the exploration of Media Rich
Internet Applications (MRIAs). Topics include communications for media ecologies,
distributed web application frameworks, advanced interactivity, data transformation, representation, automation, persistence, and large scale systems deployment. In addition, students
are exposed to concepts and technologies related to the next generation of MRIA development. (Prerequisites: IGME-330 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS
or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-431 
Digital Video for the Web
Web-deployed video is an increasingly important medium. It is used for illustration, instruction, entertainment and marketing. Students working with video for the web require an
understanding of its inherent qualities, limitations and how it may be implemented. This
course will focus on video and specifically how to create and implement quality work suitable
for web delivery. (Prerequisites: IGME-202 and IGME-230 or equivalent courses and student
standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-440 
Online Virtual Worlds and Simulations
Students will create online virtual worlds and simulations using 3D development technologies.
Critical to the exploration of this area, students will learn to utilize 3D constructs for the presentation of and interaction with interactive content and dynamic experiences. The course allows
students to integrate prior knowledge in design, programming, and interaction for the creation
of such experiences. Individual and group projects will be required. (Prerequisites: IGME-202
and (MATH-182 or MATH-186) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-450 
Casual Game Development
This course explores the design and construction of casual game experiences. Topics include
modes of casual game play, mechanics for casual games, characteristics of successful games,
development processes, and the distribution of casual games. Students will create casual games,
and employ technologies to address issues of scalability, presentation, social interconnectivity, and game analytics. (Prerequisites: IGME-330 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-451 
Systems Concepts for Games and Media
This course focuses on systems-based theoretical models of computation in the context of a
media-delivery modality. Students will explore concepts such as memory management, parallel processing, platform limitations, storage, scheduling, system I/O, and optimization from
a media-centric perspective. Particular emphasis will be placed on the integration of these
concepts in relation to industry standard hardware including game consoles, mobile devices,
custom input hardware, etc. (Prerequisites: IGME-309 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-460 
Data Visualization
Our world is flooded with data, and making sense of it can be a challenge. Visualizations help
by exposing information, trends, and correlations that might otherwise go unnoticed in the
raw data. In this course, students will learn to collect, clean, organize, and filter data sets of
their own choosing. They will learn and apply principles from multiple fields including visual
design, the psychology of perception, user experience design, and ethics. They will create static
and interactive visualizations with a variety of information structures (hierarchies, maps, timelines, etc.). Students will learn to develop exploratory experiences that tell the “story” within
the data. Programming projects are required. (Prerequisites: IGME-330 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

IGME-470 
Physical Computing and Alternative Interfaces
The rich variety and widespread adoption of gestural touch screens, motion-sensing devices,
weight-reactive surfaces, wearable digital devices, and similar interface products demonstrates
the demand for well-integrated devices and services that seamlessly couple people and environments. Such products can interface computers with real-world inputs and outputs, and
give people new ways of controlling and experiencing their devices and information. This
course provides a rapid technical introduction to basic electronics (components, circuits, microcontrollers, etc.) and emphasizes the application of interface design concepts to physically
interactive and innovative product development. The course requires solo and team projects that blend electronics, programming, and design. (Prerequisites: IGME-202 or equivalent
course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3
(Fall)
IGME-499 
Undergraduate Co-op
Cooperative education is a work experience designed to supplement the educational process.
Students may select from a range of activities designated as cooperative education, including
relevant industrial experience, internships, entrepreneurial activities, as well as faculty-supervised research and innovation opportunities. (Enrollment in this course requires permission
from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IGME-529 
Foundations of Interactive Narrative
This course focuses on the major elements of narrative for interactive environments. Students
in this course explore the basics of narrative in the context of interactive games and media, with
examination of digital storytelling in games and interactive environments of several varieties. Branching narrative, hypertext, multi- and non-linear concepts are also explored with an
emphasis on balancing immersive and interactive aspects of digital narrative. (Prerequisites:
IGME-202 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-540 
Foundations of Game Graphics Programming
Students will explore the use of an advanced graphics API to access hardware-accelerated graphics in a real-time graphics engine context. The course will involve discussion of scene graphs,
optimizations, and integration with the API object structure, as well as input schemes, content
pipelines, and 2D and 3D rendering techniques. Students will also explore the advanced use of
the API calls in production code to construct environments capable of real-time performance.
Students will construct from scratch a fully functional graphics engine, with library construction
for game development. (Prerequisites: IGME-309 or equivalent course and student standing
in GAMEDES-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IGME-550 
Foundations of Game Engine Design and Development
This course will provide students with theory and practical skills in game engine design topic
areas such as understanding the graphics pipeline as it influences engine design, hardware principles and the relationship to game engine construction, mathematical principles involved in
game engine design, scene graph construction and maintenance, texture and materials management, collision systems, physics systems, particle systems, and control systems. Furthermore,
this course will examine software and toolsets that assist game engine designers in their tasks.
Students will be expected to design and implement a game engine in teams as well as properly document their design and development strategy. (Prerequisites: IGME-540 or equivalent
course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-560 
Artificial Intelligence for Game Environments
This course explores introductory artificial intelligence concepts through both a theoretical and
practical perspective, with an emphasis on how to apply these concepts in a game development
context. In particular the course focuses on applying concepts such as search, reactive intelligence, knowledge representation, and machine learning to real-time situations and applications
as relevant to the field of entertainment technology and simulation. (Prerequisites: IGME-309 or
equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDES-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-570 
Digital Audio Production
Technologies and techniques for producing and manipulating digital audio are explored. Topics
include digital representations of sound, digital audio recording and production, MIDI, synthesis techniques, real-time performance issues, and the application of digital audio to multimedia
and Web production. (Prerequisites: IGME-202 or equivalent course and student standing in
GAMEDES-BS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IGME-571 
Interactive Game and Audio
This course provides students with exposure to the design, creation and production of audio
in interactive applications and computer games. Students will become familiar with the use
of sound libraries, recording sounds in the studio and in the field, generating sound with synthesizers, and effects processing. Students will create sound designs for interactive media,
integrating music, dialog, ambient sound, sound effects and interface sounds within interactive
programs. (Prerequisites: IGME-202 or equivalent course and student standing in GAMEDESBS or NWMEDID-BS.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

33

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

IGME-580 
IGM Production Studio
This course will allow students to work as domain specialists on teams completing one or
more large projects over the course of the semester. The projects will be relevant to experiences of the Interactive Games and Media programs, but will require expertise in a variety
of sub-domains, including web design and development, social computing, computer game
development, multi-user media, human-computer interaction and streaming media. Students
will learn to apply concepts of project management and scheduling, production roles and
responsibilities, and their domain skill sets to multidisciplinary projects. Students will complete
design documents, progress reports and final assessments of themselves and their teammates
in addition to completing their assigned responsibilities on the main projects. (This course
is restricted to students in NWMEDID-BS or GAMEDES-BS with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-581 
Innovation and Invention
In this course, students explore the process and products of innovation and invention. Each
term a multi-disciplinary team of students conceives and develops a different "outside the box"
project. Readings, projects, scholarly term papers, and pragmatic challenges of collaboration
and communication across disciplines provides direct experience of the interplay of technology, human nature, and a human environment in which emerging technologies and new modes
of interaction are pervasive and ubiquitous. Artists, natural scientists, social scientists, and
technologists are guided through a series of collaborative experiences inventing, designing,
implementing and studying emerging technologies. Presentations, projects and individuallywritten research papers are required. The faculty staff and resources of the Center for Student
Innovation are significant assets for this course. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-582 
Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software Development
This course provides students with exposure to the design, creation and production of Open
Source Software projects. Students will be introduced to the historic intersections of technology and intellectual property rights and will become familiar with Open Source development
processes, tools and practices. They will become contributing members of humanitarian software development communities such as the One Laptop Per Child and Sugar communities.
Students will actively document their efforts on Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software
community hubs. (This course is restricted to students in NWMEDID-BS or GAMEDES-BS
with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IGME-583 
Legal and Business Aspects of FOSS
The entertainment and software industries are grappling with the impacts of “free software”
digital distribution. Agile development, 3D printing, the Internet and other technologies are
changing the face of how business is done, as well as what business can charge for and hold
onto. Disruptive technologies, emerging interfaces, and real-time, on-demand product creation
and distribution are transforming our entertainment, telecommunications and manufacturing
landscapes. This course will examine the impacts of these new technologies and the new thinking that are taking us into these new worlds. (Prerequisites: IGME-582 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IGME-584 
Software Development on Linux Systems
Students will learn how to package software for release and engage in version maintenance
within the FOSS community. Topics such as Linux package management, version control
systems, potential license conflicts, development vs. production releases, bug tracking, maintenance management, forking, patching and future development will be covered in from both
a management and end-user perspective in lectures, lab exercises and a project. (Prerequisites:
IGME-582 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-585 
Project in FOSS Development
Free and Open Source Software development is an internationally growing methodology for
distributing work across multiple developers. The process can be applied to small “garagesized” teams (small utility packages, multimedia plugins, simple games) or teams of hundreds
(Mozilla, Java, Linux). This course builds on the introductory experience provided in the prerequisite to provide hands-on open-source development experience in a large-scale, project
that will be prepared for open-source distribution. The actual projects and domains addressed
will vary offering to offering, but will be along the lines of those listed above. (Prerequisites:
IGME-582 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IGME-588 
New Media Team Project
This course is designed to engage the New Media major in a capstone production experience.
The instructor will form interdisciplinary student teams that will design, plan, prototype, and
implement new media projects. Student groups are required to test their product with users
and provide written feedback and analysis. (This course is restricted to NWMEDID-BS students with at least 4th year standing.) Lab, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

34	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

IGME-589 
Research Studio
This course will allow students to work as domain specialists on teams completing one or
more faculty research projects over the course of the semester. The faculty member teaching
the class will provide the research topic(s). Students will learn about research methodology to
implement, test, and evaluate results of projects. Students will complete research reports and
final assessments of themselves and their teammates in addition to completing their assigned
responsibilities on the main projects. (A minimum of 3rd year standing is required to enroll.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IGME-590 
Undergraduate Seminar in IGM
This is intended to allow for special one-time offerings of undergraduate topics or to allow faculty to pilot new undergraduate offerings. Specific course details (such as the course topics,
format, resource needs, and credit hours) will be determined by the faculty member(s) who propose a given special-topics offering. (This course is restricted to students in NWMEDID-BS or
GAMEDES-BS with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IGME-599 
Independent Study
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty advisor on a topic not
covered in other courses. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Medical Informatics
MEDI-130 
Computers in Medicine
This course begins with a historical perspective on computing in medicine. It reviews software and hardware from supercomputers to mobile devices, and surveys their use in medical
practice, research, and education. Next it studies the nature of medical data, its collection, organization and use. This sets the stage for the major part of the course which studies important
applications of computing to medicine, including Hospital Information Systems (HIS), medical
imaging, surgery, telemedicine, and pharmacy. Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDI-150 
Introduction to Medical Informatics
An introduction to informatics as applied to the medical field. A study of the nature of medical information and its use in clinical practice, medical research, and medical education. The
Electronic Medical Record (EMR) and its impact on health care delivery. The Internet and
mobile computing as sources of medical information. The Health Care Information Systems,
their development, selection and implementation. The importance of the computing or informatics specialists in medicine and the various roles they can play. Privacy, confidentiality and
information security including health care regulatory and accreditation issues and the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDI-245 
Medical Informatics Seminar
This is an introduction to the use of computers in medical practice, education and research.
Every week a different speaker from the medical field gives a presentation. Students also receive
information concerning career opportunities and cooperative education. Lecture 1, Credits
1 (Spring)
MEDI-310 
Developing Medical Applications
Developing Medical Applications After having successful completed one semester of computer programming in an object oriented programming language, the students in this course
learn new computing systems suitable for developing medical applications. These computing
systems are popular in hospitals and other health care facilities for both traditional and Web
based database applications. Programming projects are required. (Prerequisites: ISTE-120 or
equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDI-320 
Medical Database Architectures
This course, designed for BS students with a major or concentration in Medical Informatics,
will provide an in-depth exposure to the design, development, and use of medical databases.
Topics may include existing medical databases, flat-file and relational databases, medical data
formats, database design and implementation, both relational and object-relational databases,
database applications, JDBC, ODBC, SQL, ad hoc queries, desktop and web-based user interfaces, and database administration topics. (Prerequisites: MEDI-310 (4006-310) and ISTE-230
(4002-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDI-330 
The Electronic Health Record
The Electronic Health Record This course provides an introduction and hands-on practice in
both the use and development of electronic health records. Students address issues related to
the acquisition, storage, and use of information in computer-based health records including the
various types of information used in clinical care: text, structured data, images, audio, video,
etc. Other topics covered include: clinical vocabularies (existing schemes and their limitations);
how clinical information is generated and utilized; methods of information storage and retrieval; and the legal, social and regulatory problems associated with electronic health records such
as security and confidentiality. Programming assignments will be required. (Prerequisites:
MEDI-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

MEDI-430 
Medical Application Integration
Medical Application Integration This course will provide students with an understanding of
application integration in healthcare. Java programming assignments will be required. Students
will also learn medical business processes and how they impact data integration within a hospital. Middleware message brokers will be examined along with the use of the HL7 messaging
standard. Web services and other forms of data integration will be studied. (Prerequisites:
MEDI-330 and ISTE-121 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

NSSA-244 Virtualization
This class will take the students through the evolution of virtualization. The class begins with
virtual network topologies such as VLANs, trunks and virtual routing and forwarding. The
class will examine the various desktop virtualization platforms (Type 1) such as VirtualBox
and VMWare workstation. Midway through the class students will transition into bare metal
hypervisors (Type 2) and server virtualization. Elements of software defined networking and
cloud computing will also be discussed. (Prerequisites: NSSA-221 and NSSA-241 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Networking, Security, and Systems Administration

NSSA-245 
Network Services
An investigation of the tasks of selecting, configuring and administering services in an internetworking environment. Topics include the TCP/IP protocol suite, service administration
including DHCP, DNS, SSH, Kerberos, and an introductionto directory services. Students
completing this course will have experience in administering, monitoring and securing
an internetwork of computers with a variety of these services as well as an understanding
of the similarities and differences between protocols in the TCP/IP suite (TCP and UDP).
(Prerequisites: NSSA-241 and (NSSA-220 or CSCI-141) or equivalent courses..) Lab 2, Lecture
4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

NSSA-101 
NSA Themes
This course is an introduction to the fundamentals from each of the primary areas of the
Networking, Security and Systems Administration (NSSA) domain. Students will develop a
collective view of the NSSA field as they experience and integrate the perspectives of the subdomain areas. Students will carry this perspective into the other supporting coursework of
their degree program. Topics will focus on the core concepts in the three areas: 1.) wired and
wireless networking; 2.) system and network security and awareness, and 3.) systems administration. Emerging technologies in each of the areas will be explored. A project and case studies
will be used as the basis for exploring and interrelating each of the fundamental topics. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-102 
Computer Systems Concepts
This course teaches the student the essential technologies needed by NSSA majors, focused on
PC and mainframe hardware topics. They include: how those platforms operate, how they are
configured, and the operation of their major internal components. Also covered are the basic
operating system interactions with those platforms, physical security of assets, and computingcentric mathematical concepts. Lab 2, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-220 
Task Automation Using Interpretive Languages
An introduction to the Unix operating system and scripting in the Perl and Unix shell languages. The course will cover basic user-level commands to the Unix operating system, followed by
basic control structures, and data structures in Perl. Examples will include GUI programming,
and interfacing to an underlying operating system. Following Perl, students will be introduced
to the basics of shell programming using the Unix bash shell. Students will need one year of
programming in an object-oriented language. (Prerequisite: ISTE-101 or ISTE-121 or CSCI142 or equivalent course.) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-221 
Systems Administration I
This course is designed to give students an understanding of the role of the system administrator
in large organizations. This will be accomplished through a discussion of many of the tasks and
tools of system administration. Students will participate in both a lecture section and a separate
lab section. The technologies discussed in this class include: operating systems, system security,
and service deployment strategies. (Prerequisites: (NSSA-220 or CSCI-141) and (NSSA-102 or
CSEC-101) and NSSA-241 or equivalent courses.) Lab 2, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-241 
Introduction to Routing and Switching
This course is an introduction to wired network infrastructures, topologies, technologies
and protocols required for effective end-to-end communication. Basic security concepts are
also introduced at the local area network communication level. Networking layers 1, 2 and
3 are examined in-depth using the International Standards Organization’s Open Systems
Interconnection and TCP/IP models. Topics focus on the TCP/IP protocol suite, the Ethernet
LAN protocol, and routed and routing protocols common in local area networks. Labs will
cover the various aspects of communication, management and security on equipment found
in industry. (Prerequisites: NSSA-102 or CSEC-101 or equivalent courses.) Lab 2, Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-242 
Wireless Networking
This course is designed to provide the student with an understanding of the protocols, principles
and concepts of radio and optical communication as they apply to wireless data networking
for local area networks and peripherals. As its basis it uses the fundamental concepts and
technologies learned in Introduction to Routing and Switching, and expands upon them to
include other contemporary and emerging technologies. Topics including WLANs, wireless
network operation, network integration, construction and network design will be discussed.
Modulation techniques, measurement standards, nomenclature, equipment and theory behind
transmissions in this portion of the electromagnetic spectrum will be examined. (Prerequisites:
NSSA-241 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

NSSA-320 
Configuration Management
This course teaches students advanced techniques in the Perl language. Techniques include the
use and construction of object oriented scripts, user administration and monitoring, file system
walking and checking, and computer and network security issues. (Prerequisites: NSSA-220
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-322 
Systems Administration II
An investigation of the tasks of selecting, configuring and administering services in an internetworking environment. Topics include the TCP/IP protocol suite, service administration
including DHCP, DNS, SSH, and Kerberos. Students completing this course will have experience in administering an internetwork of computers with a variety of these services as well as
an understanding of the similarities and differences between protocols in the TCP/IP suite (TCP
and UDP). This course is a writing intensive course and students will be expected to complete
several writing projects as part of the course. Students will participate in both a lecture section
and a separate lab section. (Prerequisites: NSSA-221 and NSSA-245 or equivalent courses.)
Lab 2, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-341 
VoIP and Real Time Data
Students will explore the issues associated with migrating to newer systems and implement their
own IP based data networks. These networks will be designed to carry real time data, including
IP telephony. (Prerequisites: NSSA-242 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NSSA-342 
VoIP and Unified Communications II
This course will discuss the changing nature of communication, the requirements of emerging applications, the effect on network design, quality of service and the associated security
concerns. The focus is on the evolution of multimedia services (such as voice and video) and
Internetworking technologies in support convergence. While examining upcoming technologies
and future trends that will impact the direction of IP and broadband technology development, of
primary concern will be standards, protocols, deployment, and emerging technologies involved
in the Voice over IP, Video over IP and Unified Communication systems. (Prerequisites: NSSA341 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NSSA-370 
Project Management
This course teaches the student the essential project management skills needed by NSA majors.
Students will gain experience with project lifecycles, and a sampling of Project Management
best practices will be covered. Students will use appropriate software tools applied to small
project management tasks. (This class is restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-422 
Storage Architectures
This course provides students with a theoretical as well as hands-on exposure to enterprise scale
storage technologies such as storage area networks and network attached storage. Students
will study SCSI, Fibre Chanel, IP Storage, Infiniband, and Fibre Channel over Ethernet both
in lectures and labs. They will also gain a better appreciation for the importance of storage
architectures in the enterprise. (Prerequisites: NSSA-322 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-423 
Scalable Computing Architectures
This course explores mid-range (server farms and clusters) and mainframe system architecture, hardware, configuration, and operating system concepts. Students in this course gain
understanding of the reasons companies choose mid-range and large-scale systems for their
computing environments and how those firms implement those architectures. (Prerequisites:
ISTE-101 or ISTE-121 or equivalent course and minimum of 3rd year standing.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

35

B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences

NSSA-425 
Data Center Operations
This course provides students with a background in the technologies and techniques used
to design, implement, and maintain a modern data center. This course will help students to
see the interrelated nature of many of these topics and to gain a better understanding of the
role of the following technologies in a modern data center: physical facility design, network
infrastructures, power distribution, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), storage, high-availability computing, disaster recovery, and emerging data center technologies.
(Prerequisites: NSSA-322 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-426 
System Design and Deployment
Problems or the implementation of a new business strategy requiring the support of computing solutions for their resolution or success must first be systematically analyzed to determine
the most effective and cost efficient solution. Once the solution is defined and designed it must
then be successfully deployed. This course will help students develop skills in in the areas of
requirements gathering, requirements analysis and group problem solving. Using prerequisite knowledge students will design a solution. Students will learn the about the consequences
of new technology solutions and how to plan a successful deployment and implementation of
their technological solution. (Prerequisites: NSSA-322 or equivalent course and 4th year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-441 
Advanced Routing and Switching
Advanced Routing and Switching covers advanced networking technologies available to enterprises to build a large intranet infrastructure. Protocol options and tools to analyze and optimize
performance are explored in depth. Topics include: WANs, WAN protocols, IPv6 and transition
issues, core routers and routing protocols, queuing and Quality of service, redistribution, multicast routing, access control lists, variable length subnet masking, network address translation,
MultiProtocol Label Switching, RSTP, shortest path bridging emerging switching technologies, VLAN tagging, trunking, and port aggregation. (Prerequisites: NSSA-241 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-443 
Network Design and Performance
This course will examine the design and performance of networks. Students will learn to design
networks based on identified needs and analyze the performance of that network. The designs
include site, campus, and enterprise. WAN technologies will be combined with LAN technologies in the design of enterprise networks. A simulation tool may be used to implement the
design as a network model and evaluate the performance of the network model. (Prerequisites:
NSSA-241 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSSA-445 
Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Networks
This course will help students to identify the major issues associated with ad-hoc/sensor networks. Students will explore current ad-hoc/sensor technologies by researching key areas such
as algorithms, protocols, hardware, and applications. Students will learn to develop simulation
models of real sensor and ad hoc networks and study their performance when applying different wireless routing solutions. At the end of this course students will gain hands-on experience
through real-world simulation projects on ad-hoc/sensor hardware. Students are required to
have one year of programming in an object-oriented language. (Prerequisites: NSSA-242 and
ISTE-101 or ISTE-121 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Software Engineering
SWEN-101 
Software Engineering Freshman Seminar
Provides first-year students with the skills necessary to succeed at RIT and in the software engineering program. Small group sessions are used to help new students make friends, create a
stronger bond with RIT and their program and become acquainted with the campus and its
facilities. In addition, students are introduced to the profession of software engineering and
to ethical issues they will face at RIT and throughout their careers. Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Fall)
SWEN-220 
Mathematical Models of Software
An introduction to the use of mathematics to model software as part of the software process.
Included will be models of software structure and functionality, concurrent and distributed
computation, and structured data. ) (Prerequisites: MATH-190 or 1055-265 or equivalent
course) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SWEN-250 
Personal Software Engineering
This is a project-based course to enhance individual, technical engineering knowledge and
skills as preparation for upper-division team-based coursework. Topics include adapting to
new languages, tools and technologies; developing and analyzing models as a prelude to implementation; software construction concepts (proper documentation, implementing to standards
etc.); unit and integration testing; component-level estimation; and software engineering professionalism. (Prerequisite: CSCI-141 with a grade of C- or better or a co-requisite of CSCI-140
or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

36	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

SWEN-256 
Software Process and Project Management
An introductory course to software process and related software project management issues.
Emphasis is on the study, use, evaluation, and improvement of the software development process and related project management. Topics include software development methodologies,
software project planning and tracking, change control, software quality assurance, risk management, and software process assessment and improvement. (Prerequisites: SWEN-261 or
equivalent course) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-261 
Introduction to Software Engineering
An introductory course in software engineering, emphasizing the organizational aspects of software development and software design and implementation by individuals and small teams
within a process/product framework. Topics include the software lifecycle, software design,
user interface issues, specification and implementation of components, assessing design quality,
design reviews and code inspections, software testing, basic support tools, technical communications and system documentation, team-based development. A term-long, team-based
project done in a studio format is used to reinforce concepts presented in class. (Prerequisite:
CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003-243 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-262 
Engineering of Software Subsystems
An introduction to the principles of the foundations of contemporary software design. Topics
include software subsystem modeling, design patterns, design tradeoffs, and component-based
software development, with a focus on application of these concepts to concrete design problems. The relationship between design and related process issues such as testing, estimation,
and maintenance are also discussed. (Prerequisites: SWEN-261 and (SWEN-250 or (CSCI243 or 4003-334) or CMPE-380 or SOFTENG-MN) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-331 
Engineering Secure Software
Principles and practices forming the foundation for developing secure software systems.
Coverage ranges across the entire development lifecycle: requirements, design, implementation and testing. Emphasis is on practices and patterns that reduce or eliminate security
breaches in software intensive systems, and on testing systems to expose security weaknesses.
(Prerequisites: SWEN-261 or equivalent course) Studio 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SWEN-342 
Engineering of Concurrent and Distributed Software Systems
The principles, practices and patterns applicable to the design and construction of concurrent
and distributed software systems. Topics include synchronization, coordination and communication; deadlock, safety and liveness; concurrent and distributed design patterns; analysis
of performance; distributed state management. (Prerequisites: ((SWEN-220 and SWEN-262)
or 4010-362) or equivalent courses.) Studio 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SWEN-343 
Engineering of Enterprise Software Systems
This course addresses architecture-level design of large, enterprise-critical software systems.
The course focuses on enterprise-level design patterns and on design approaches for objectoriented and aspect-oriented application containers: encapsulating database access, application
distribution, concurrent session management, security, scalability, reliability, web-based user
interaction, and the programming models and tools to support system development, integration, testing, and deployment. Hands-on exercises and a team project will reinforce the course
concepts and expose students to the complexity of these systems. (Prerequisites: ((SWEN-220
and SWEN-262) or 4010-362) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SWEN-344 
Engineering of Web Based Software Systems
A course in web engineering, emphasizing organizational aspects of web development, design
and implementation by individuals and small teams. Students will be instructed in the proper
application of software engineering principles to the creation of web applications. Course topics
will include, but not be limited to web usability, accessibility, testing, web services, databases,
requirements elicitation & negotiation. A term-long, team-based project done in a studio format is used to reinforce concepts presented in class. (Prerequisites: SWEN-262 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-350 
Software Process and Product Quality
This course covers advanced topics in software engineering relating to software quality, with
processes and metrics being viewed as a means to achieving quality. Quality is interpreted
broadly to include product functionality and performance, project schedule and budget, and
business objectives. Software metrics help a software organization on two main fronts: quality assessment of its products and processes, and process improvement towards its main
goal: the production of successful software artifacts within schedule and budget constraints.
(Prerequisites: SWEN-256 and STAT-205 and SWEN-499 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

SWEN-352 
Software Testing
Concepts and techniques for testing soft ware and assuring its quality. Topics cover software
testing at the unit and system levels; static vs. dynamic analysis; functional testing; inspections; and reliability assessment. (Prerequisites: SWEN-261 or equivalent course) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-356 
Trends in Software Development Processes
A course in the exploration of current approaches in planning, executing and managing the
project activities performed during the development of a professional software product. Topics
include the characteristics of state of the practice development methods, selecting practices
best suited based on project context and techniques for refining practices to achieve process
improvement. Students work on team projects inclusive of all development life cycle activities to reinforce concepts presented in class. (Prerequisites: SWEN-256 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SWEN-383 
Software Design Principles and Patterns
Quality software designs and architectures reflect software engineering principles that represent
best contemporary practice. This course focuses on explicating these fundamental principles,
examining a set of design and architecture patterns that embody the principles, and applying
patterns appropriate to a design problem in a given context. Restricted to IST majors only.
(Prerequisites: ISTE-240 or equivalent course.Co-requisite: ISTE-340 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-440 
Software System Requirements and Architecture
Principles and practices related to identifying software system stakeholders, eliciting functional and quality requirements, translating requirements into architectural structures, and
analyzing candidate architectures with respect to the requirements. (Prerequisite: SWEN-499
or equivalent course) Studio 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-444 
Human-Centered Requirements and Design
This course introduces quantitative models and techniques of human-computer interface analysis, design and evaluation, which are relevant to the Software Engineering approach of software
development. User-focused requirements engineering topics are also covered. Contemporary
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) techniques are surveyed, with a focus on when and where
they are applicable in the software development process. Students will deliver usable software systems derived from an engineering approach to the application of scientific theory
and modeling. Other topics may include: usability evaluation design, methods of evaluation,
data analysis, social and ethical impacts of usability, prototyping and tools. (Prerequisites:
SWEN-262 or equivalent course.Co-requisites: STAT-205 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-498 
Software Engineering CIR Experience
This course may be taken in lieu of one of the four co-operative education blocks to provide
experience in non-traditional venues for creativity, innovation and research. Registration conditional on submitted plan of activity and approval of Department of Software Engineering.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Summer)
SWEN-499 
Software Engineering Co-op
Software Engineering co-op work block. One quarter of appropriate paid work experience in
industry. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SWEN-548 
SE Affinity Research Group
This course is a project-based, research-focused course that supports teamwork, collaboration,
and both professional and technical skill building. Students will work in teams that consist
of both students and professor. Topics include: research methods, technical communication,
and technical topics that are relevant to the project(s). (Prerequisites: SWEN-261 or equivalent
course) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SWEN-549 
Software Engineering Design Seminar
Emerging topics of relevance in software engineering design. (Prerequisites: SWEN-262 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-559 
Software Engineering Process Seminar
Emerging topics of relevance in software engineering process. (Prerequisites: SWEN-256 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

SWEN-561 
Software Engineering Project I
The first course in a two-course, senior-level, capstone project experience. Students work as
part of a team to develop solutions to problems posed by either internal or external customers.
Problems may require considerable software development or evolution and maintenance of
existing software products. Culminates with the completion and presentation of the first major
increment of the project solution. Students must have co-op completed to enroll. (Prerequisites:
SWEN-256 and SWEN-444 and SWEN-499 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall,
Summer)
SWEN-562 
Software Engineering Project II
This is the second course in a two-course, senior-level capstone project experience. Students
submit one or more additional increments that build upon the solution submitted at the end
of the first course. Students make major presentations for both customers as well as technical-oriented audiences, turn over a complete portfolio of project-related artifacts and offer an
evaluation of the project and team experience. (Prerequisites: SWEN-561 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-563 
Real-Time and Embedded Systems
This course provides a general introduction to real-time and embedded systems. It will introduce a representative family of microcontrollers and require students to program on these
devices. Fundamental material on real-time operating systems, such as requirements specification, scheduling algorithms and priority inversion avoidance will be presented. The features
of a commercial real-time operating system will be discussed and used for course projects.
(Prerequisites: SWEN-220 or CSCI-251 or CMPE-380 or ((CPET-201 and CPET-202) or 0618303) or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SWEN-564 
Modeling of Real-Time Systems
This course introduces the modeling of real-time software systems.? It takes an engineering
approach to the design of these systems by analyzing system models before beginning implementation.? UML will be the primary modeling methodology. Non-UML methodologies will
also be discussed.? Implementations of real-time systems will be developed manually from the
models and using automated tools to generate the code. (Prerequisites: SWEN-220 or CSCI-251
or CMPE-380 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SWEN-565 
Performance Engineering of Real-Time and Embedded Systems
This course discusses issues of performance in real-time and embedded systems. Techniques
for profiling the resource usage of a system and for measuring the effect of increasing system requirements will be covered. The control of physical systems will motivate the need for
performance tuning of a real-time system. Students will write programs running under a realtime operating system that can maintain control of a physical system. The course will discuss
and experiment with performance trade-offs that can be made using hardware-software codesign. (Prerequisites: SWEN-220 or CSCI-251 or CMPE-380 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SWEN-567 
Hardware/Software Co-Design for Cryptographic Applications
The objective of this course is to establish knowledge and skills necessary for efficient implementations of cryptographic primitives on reconfigurable hardware. Implementation platform
will be a field programmable gate array (FPGAs) containing general purpose processor and
additional reconfigurable fabric for implementations of custom hardware accelerators. In the
studio format students work on team projects that require them to design, and then compare
and contrast software, custom FPGA hardware, and hybrid hardware-software co-design implementations of selected cryptographic primitives. (Prerequisite: SWEN-261 and CSCI-462 or
equivalent courses.) Studio 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SWEN-590 
Software Engineering Seminar
Emerging topics of relevance in software engineering. Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-598 
Honors Independent Study
The honors student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty adviser on a
topic not covered in other courses. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
SWEN-599 
Independent Study
The student will work independently under the supervision of a faculty adviser on a topic not
covered in other courses (proposal signed by a faculty member) (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits
1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

37

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

Kate Gleason College of Engineering
Index
CQAS	
BIME	
CHME	
CMPE	
EEEE	
EGEN	
ISEE	
MECE	
MCEE	

Applied Statistics.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Biomedical Engineering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Chemical Engineering .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Computer Engineering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Electrical Engineering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
General Engineering.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Industrial and Systems Engineering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Mechanical Engineering .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Microelectronic Engineering .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

38
38
40
41
42
45
46
47
50

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Applied Statistics
CQAS-325 
Design of Experiments for Biomedical Engineers
Topics covered include: observational versus experimental studies, fundamentals of good
design, including randomization, replication, blocking, and blinding; one-factor designs: completely randomized, randomized complete block, and Latin-Square designs; fixed and random
effects; analysis of residuals; two-factor and factorial designs; repeated measures designs; twolevel factorial and fractional factorial designs. Lectures and assignments incorporate real-world
examples and critiques of studies in the literature. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Biomedical Engineering
BIME-181 
Intro to Biomedical Engineering
This course will provide an overview of the discipline. The students also have an opportunity
to interact with their curricular adviser and obtain a clear understanding of the program and
the possible curricular options. It will consist of the following components: 1) Overview of the
discipline including an introduction to relevant literature, organizations, examples of successes,
on-going going challenges and possible new opportunities. 2) Introduction of an engineering
methodology applicable to biomedical problems. 3) Opportunity to address a simple biomedical
engineering related problem that necessitates problem statement, research, solution proposal
and summary report and presentation of results. 4) Introduction to team dynamics, organization and interpersonal communication associated with working with a multidisciplinary team.
(BIME-BS) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall)
BIME-182 
Intro to Programming for Biomedical Engineering
Builds on the overview of the field of biomedical engineering presented in BIME-181 course
with the following additional components: 1) Introduction to programming as an organized,
problem solving method (MATLAB and LabVIEW or equivalent). 2) Application of programming for the purpose of removing artifacts from measured signals and analysis of signal
properties including their statistical properties. 3) Addressing a simple biomedical engineering
related problem that requires and necessitates a problem statement, research, solution proposal,
data acquisition and processing, data analysis, and summary report and presentation of results
(Prerequisites: BIME-181 or EGEN-100 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
BIME-200 
Introductory Musculoskeletal Biomechanics
This course is an introduction to the structures and components of the human body as well
as their basic functionality. Essential elements of human anatomy and histology will be
presented and students will be encouraged to correlate their structure and function with nonhuman structures and devices that might be considered as replacements or improvements.
Fundamental concepts in biomechanics will be introduced and integrated with relevant topics
from physics. Variability in dimensions and the concepts of normal and exceptional ranges of
values in terms of populations will be introduced and how they need to be accounted for and
accommodated. (Prerequisites: PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 1017389 or PHYS-206 and PHYS-207 or equivalent course and student standing in the BIME-BS
program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

38	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

BIME-250 
Biosystems Process Analysis
This is the first in a two course sequence that exposes the student to engineering problem solving methodologies within the context of issues relevant to biomedical engineering. The course
provides a pragmatic link between the basic sciences and the generic strategies and tools that
engineers use to solve complex problems. A key emphasis will be the disciplined approach
engineers use to define the scope of a problem and breakdown a system into elements that are
amenable to analysis. An important step is anticipating cause-and-effect behaviors in a system.
Engineers develop analytical abstractions of system elements in order to predict such behavior. Students will be taught how engineers develop such abstractions, drawing on knowledge
from the basic sciences and mathematics, combined with judicious use of approximations.
The positive and negative consequences of using approximations and estimation techniques
on the outcome will be discussed and analyzed. A predominantly deterministic approach to
engineering analysis and problem solving will be covered and will be used as a foundation for
the analysis of more complex systems and more realistic stochastic methodologies that will
be developed in Engineering Analysis II (BIME-450). The course also introduces appropriate software tools including application software packages for spreadsheet based analysis and
graphing. (Prerequisites: PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 1017-389
or PHYS-206 and PHYS-207 or equivalent course and student standing in the BIME-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIME-320 
Fluid Mechanics
This course exposes students to the fundamentals of static and flowing fluids at both largescale (control volumes) and local differential scales. Student learn how to examine forces on
solids due to static and flowing fluids, estimate head losses and pumping requirements in piping systems. The art of engineering approximation is examined through estimates of forces
due to flow on solids, as well as limiting cases involving internal pipe flows with friction factors. Exact solutions of local differential equations of fluid mechanics are considered under
both steady state and transient conditions, and these analyses are used to determine forces in
control volume analysis of bodies. The important interplay between differential and control
volume analyses in solving problems is emphasized. Lastly, students are taught to make analogies about the concepts learned in generic fluid mechanics and apply them to the circulatory
system, while outlining appropriate limitations. (Prerequisites: PHYS-211 and MATH-231)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIME-370 
Introduction to Biomaterials Science
This course is intended to provide an overview of materials used in biomedical applications,
both internal and external to the human body. The specific objective of this course is to present
the principles which apply to the properties and selection of materials used in medical applications. Topics include structure and properties of metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites;
fundamental composition of biological tissues; material performance in hostile environments,
the basic processes associated with wound healing; and principles associated with the interaction between biological tissues and artificial materials. (Prerequisites: CHMG-141, CHMG-142,
BIME-200 and BIOG-140 or equivalent courses.Co-requisite: BIOG-141 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIME-391 
Biomechanics and Biomaterials Lab
Laboratory experiments are conducted to explore and reinforce fundamental principles and
concepts introduced in BIME-200 (Introduction to Musculoskeletal Biomechanics) and BIME370 (Introduction to Biomaterial Science). The experimental procedures involve measuring
results, analyzing and interpreting data and drawing objective conclusions. Emphasis is also
placed on proper documentation and effective presentation of findings and results. Lab procedures involve manipulation and measurements of anatomical structures and samples as well
as equipment and materials designed to simulate naturally occurring tissues and structures.
(Prerequisite: BIME-200 or equivalent courses. Co-requisites: BIME-182 and BIME-370 or
equivalent course.) Lab 3, Credits 2 (Spring)
BIME-410 
Systems Physiology I
This course begins a two-course sequence designed to provide students with a broad foundational understanding of physiological mechanisms from a systems perspective. This first
course in the sequence is concerned with the fundamental aspects of cellular function including
maintenance of homeostasis, molecular transport, and cellular signaling. The course covers the
basics of electrophysiology, electrically excitable cells and tissue, the operation of the nervous
system including the central, peripheral, somatic and autonomic systems, the special senses
and the connection between the nervous system and the endocrine system. Differences and
relationships between speed, specificity and sensitivity of signaling mechanism of the nervous
system and the endocrine system will be discussed. Students will also be introduced to the basic
principles of biomedical instrumentation used in cellular physiology research. (Prerequisites:
BIME-250 and BIME-320 and BIME-370 and MATH-221 and PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or
equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

BIME-411 
Systems Physiology II
The second in a two course sequence involving the description and analysis of physiological
mechanisms from a systems point of view. The focus of this course will be on the interaction
between organ systems for the purpose of homeostasis. In particular, attention will be paid to
feedback mechanisms that involve electrical and chemical feedback and control systems. Fluid
and gas transport mechanisms associated with the cardiovascular and respiratory systems
including their regulatory behavior and the function of the kidney are introduced by way of
their contribution to fluid volume and pressures as well as its fundamental material exchange
properties. Engineering analysis methods will be applied to an open-ended problem associated
with pathological performance of some aspect of these systems and will be used to proposing
a suitable compensatory mechanism to address or eliminate it. The interaction between the
nervous, muscular, digestive, endocrine, immune, cardiovascular, renal and respiratory systems and how they affect growth and metabolism, movement, fluid and electrolyte balance,
material exchange and disease processes will be discussed. Open-ended problems and weaknesses in these mechanisms will be discussed and addressed in a quantitative and analytical
manner based on engineering analysis including simple statistics associated with population
based variations. (Writing Intensive Course) (Prerequisites: BIME-410 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIME-440 
Biomedical Signals and Analysis
Introduction to and application of signal processing techniques to evaluate and manipulate continuous and discrete time signals presumed to originate from systems that may be either linear
or non-linear, time invariant or varying and random or deterministic in nature. Representative
data sets will be used to characterize and process signals from physiological systems and processes. A multi-week project will be assigned that will consist of processing and analysis of a
typical biomedical signal source to provide a robust and consistent evaluation of some aspect
associated with the signal source based on methods discussed both in class and reported on in
the literature. (Prerequisites: BIME-182 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Recitation, Credits
4 (Spring)
BIME-450 
Numerical and Statistical Analysis of Complex Biosystems
This is the second course in a two sequence course in engineering analytical and problem
solving methodology, providing a pragmatic link between the basic sciences and the generic
strategies and tools that engineers use to predict the cause-and-effect behavior of complex
systems. Students will develop the tools to analyze the dynamic behavior of biomedical situations that are more complex, and thus require a greater degree of analytical sophistication, than
the systems examined in Engineering Analysis I. The analysis of such problems will require
the use of differential equations and numerical analysis, as well as the application of software
packages (e.g., spreadsheets, graphing, Matlab). The set of tools that are developed and whose
application is demonstrated also serve to provide a solid framework for quantitative and critical evaluation of material to be presented in upper level engineering courses. While some of the
problems analyzed will be well described by a deterministic perspective, a significant element of
the course will be the analysis of situations that are fundamentally stochastic and thus require
a probabilistic, statistical approach to their modeling and solution. (Prerequisites: MATH-221
or MATH-221H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIME-460 
Dynamics and Control of Biomedical Systems
Application of engineering analysis, modeling, problem solving and design skills to characterize
and manipulate the operation of biomedical systems for the purpose of remediating, supplanting, replacing or enhancing the function of physiological processes. This presumes that those
same tools and skills can be used to model the observed and/or known function of the physiological systems and processes under consideration. In addition to lectures, homework and
examinations, the course will a project oriented assignment to design and evaluate a model
that faithfully duplicates and predicts the operation of that process or system. (Prerequisites:
BIME-411 and BIME-440 and BIME-450 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIME-470 
Advanced Quantitative Cell Culture Techniques
This hands-on course gives engineering students experience with different culture platforms
and analysis techniques. Students will be given experiments relating to current literature and
state of the art techniques in the area of Tissue Engineering. In a project-based course style,
individual experiments require multiple weeks and students will be expected to maintain their
own cultures. (Prerequisites: BIOG-141 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 1, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
BIME-489 
Special Topics
Topics and subject areas that are not among the courses listed here are frequently offered
under the special topics title. Under the same title also may be found experimental courses that
may be offered for the first time. Such courses are offered in a formal format; that is, regularly
scheduled class sessions with an instructor. The level of complexity is commensurate with a
senior-level undergraduate technical course. (BIME-BS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

BIME-491 
Quantitative Physiological Signal Analysis Lab
Laboratory experiments are conducted to explore and reinforce fundamental principles and
concepts introduced in BIME-410 (Systems Physiology I) and BIME-440 (Biomedical Signals
and Analysis). The experimental procedures involve measuring results, analyzing and interpreting data and drawing objective conclusions. Emphasis is also placed on proper documentation
and effective presentation of findings and results. Laboratory experiments will be conducted
to investigate pressure, volume and flow relationships of the cardiovascular and respiratory
systems including the inherent variability and dynamic response to perturbations. Signal processing methods will be utilized to address ubiquitous artifacts found in measured physiological
signals. (Prerequisite: BIME-410 and BIME-440 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Credits 1 (Fall)
BIME-492 
Systems Physiology Control and Dynamics Lab
Laboratory experiments are conducted to explore and reinforce fundamental principles and concepts introduced in BIME-411 (Systems Physiology II) and BIME-460 (Dynamics and Control
of Biomedical Systems). The experimental procedures involve measuring results, analyzing
and interpreting data and drawing objective conclusions. Emphasis is also placed on proper
documentation and effective presentation of findings and results. Laboratory experiments
and simulations will be conducted to enable the prediction, observation and characterization
common physiological processes and systems. (Prerequisite: BIME-411 or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: BIME-460 and ISEE-325 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Credits 1 (Fall)
BIME-497 
Multidisciplinary Senior Design I
This is the first of a two course sequence oriented to the solution of real world engineering
design problems. This is a capstone learning experience that integrates engineering theory,
principles, and processes within a collaborative environment. Multidisciplinary student teams
follow an engineering design process, which includes assessing customer needs, developing
engineering specifications, generating and evaluating concepts, choosing an approach, completing systems and subsystems designs, and implementing the design to the extent feasible,
for example by building and testing a prototype or implementing a chosen set of improvements
to a process. (AL5-DegS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIME-498 
Multidisciplinary Senior Design II
This is the second of a two course sequence oriented to the solution of real world engineering
design problems. This is a capstone learning experience that integrates engineering theory,
principles, and processes within a collaborative environment. Multidisciplinary student teams
follow an engineering design process, which includes assessing customer needs, developing
engineering specifications, generating and evaluating concepts, choosing an approach, completing systems and subsystems designs, and implementing the design to the extent feasible,
for example by building and testing a prototype or implementing a chosen set of improvements
to a process. (Prerequisites: BIME-497 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIME-499 Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in biomedical engineering. Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring)
BIME-510 
Bioanalytical Microfluidics
This course is focused on the analysis and separation of high value biological products employing
microfluidic devices. The course will cover miniaturization, microfabrication, microfluidics
and electrohydrodynamic flow; as well as the most common separation techniques employed
in bio-analytical microdevices: chromatography, electrophoresis, dielectrophoresis, cytometry
and electrochemistry. Students will also become familiar with the recent literature on bioanalytical applications in microfluidics devices, recent journal articles will be presented in class by
the professor and the students. The course also includes three “hands on” laboratory modules.
Students will fabricate microfluidic devices and then use these devices to perform experiments
with electroosmotic flow and dielectrophoresis. (Prerequisite: MATH-221 and CHME-320 and
BIME-250) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIME-570 
Tissue Engineering
This course is intended to provide an overview of how replacement organs and tissues can be
engineered using both natural and synthetic biomaterials that direct cellular differentiation
and integration. The objectives of the course are to present how tissues can be engineered using
the physical and chemical properties of biomaterials and targeted differentiation of multi- and
pluripotent stem cells. Topics include the adhesion, migration, growth and differentiation of
cells as well as the optimization and modeling of molecular and cellular transport within and
across engineered tissues. Additionally, the course will investigate the engineering parameters
and necessary functionality of artificial tissues. (Prerequisite: BIME-370 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIME-599 
Independent Study
Allows upper-level undergraduate students an opportunity to independently investigate, under
faculty supervision, aspects of the field of computer engineering that are not sufficiently covered in existing courses. Proposals for independent study activities must be approved by both
the faculty member supervising the independent study and the department head. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

39

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

Chemical Engineering
CHME-181 
Chemical Engineering Insights I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence that provides the foundation for success in the
chemical engineering program at RIT and the field of chemical engineering. This course provides a historical perspective on the origin of the discipline and an overview of the traditional
and contemporary issues that chemical engineers address. Within this context, the course
compares and contrasts the differing roles of chemical engineers and chemists in society.
Additionally the course introduces the methodology chemical engineers use to solve problems,
engineering ethics, and career options in chemical engineering. (CHME-BS, ENGRX-UND)
Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)
CHME-182 
Chemical Engineering Insights II
This course examines how chemical engineering analysis can be applied to address some of
society’s current and future challenges. Particular attention is focused on the size and scale of
a system and its affect on the engineering constraints and the ultimate solution of problems.
The course enables students to recognize that the processes and equipment that chemical engineers design to solve local problems affect the broader problems that society faces, such the
supply of energy and preservation of the environment. The course demonstrates the power of
the system balance as an essential tool for engineering analysis, and provides students with
some elementary training in its use. (CHME-BS, ENGRX-UND) Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)
CHME-230 
Chemical Process Analysis
A first course for chemical engineers, introducing units, dimensions and dimensional analysis,
simple material and energy balances for batch and continuous systems in steady and unsteady
states with/without chemical reaction, and elementary phase equilibrium in multi-component
systems. (Prerequisities: (MATH-182 or 182A) and CHMG-142.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHME-301 
Analytical Techniques for Chemical Engineering I
Mathematical techniques necessary for engineering analysis are introduced that augment training from core mathematics and engineering courses. The spreadsheet environment is used to
implement mathematical procedures and examine data results. Topics examined include roots
of equations, curve fitting, statistics, Fourier analysis, solution of systems of algebraic equations,
optimization, numerical differentiation and integration, and the solution of ordinary and partial differential equations. Techniques are applied to mathematical problems naturally arising
in chemical engineering. (Prerequisites: MATH-221 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses.)
Lab, Recitation, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHME-302 
Analytical Techniques for Chemical Engineering II
This course introduces the student to more advanced mathematical and numerical methods necessary for engineering analysis. Mathematical problems naturally arising in chemical
engineering are used to motivate the course topics and techniques taught. The MATLAB
programming environment is utilized to facilitate computation, and students learn to use
MATLAB’s inbuilt tools as well as Simulink.. Topics examined include the solution of systems
of linear and nonlinear equations and the solution of ordinary and partial differential equations (initial and boundary value problems). Some important topics covered in CHME-301
are re-examined in the MATLAB environment, such as roots of equations, curve fitting, and
numerical integration and differentiation (Prerequisite: CHME-301 and CHME-499 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHME-310 
Applied Thermodynamics
This is a course in the fundamentals of both single and multiple-component thermodynamics. The first and second laws of thermodynamics and concepts of entropy and equilibrium are
examined in open and closed control volume systems. Energy, work, and heat requirements of
various unit operations are examined. Equations of states and properties of fluids are explored.
Phase transition and equilibrium involving single-and multiple components are examined
for both ideal and non-ideal systems. Energy released/absorbed during chemical reaction and
solution creation are imbedded in analysis of chemical engineering processes (Prerequisites:
CHME-230 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHME-320 
Continuum Mechanics I
Fundamentals of static and flowing fluids are examined on both large-scale (control volumes)
and local differential scales. Forces on solids due to static and flowing fluids are determined.
Head losses and pumping requirements are considered in piping systems. The art of engineering approximation is examined through estimates of forces due to flow on solids, as well
as various limiting cases involving internal pipe flows with friction factors. Exact solutions of
local differential equations of fluid mechanics are considered under both steady state and transient conditions, and these analyses are used to determine forces in control volume analysis of
bodies. The important interplay between differential and control volume analyses in solving
problems is emphasized. (Prerequisites: CHME-230 and MATH-231 and PHYS-211 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

40	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CHME-321 
Continuum Mechanics II
This course is the continuation of Continuum Mechanics I, and focuses on fluid flow and
heat transfer on a differential scale. Commonly-used approximations to the equations of fluid
mechanics are considered, such as creeping, potential, and boundary layer flows. Scaling is
introduced as a means of characterizing these regimes. General local differential equations and
boundary conditions describing heat transfer are derived and solved in a variety of configurations. Simplifying approximations of conduction, convection, and radiation dominated heat
transfer are introduced, and combined modes of transfer are analyzed. The performance of
heat exchangers is analyzed for a variety of common configurations. (Prerequisites: CHME320 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHME-330 
Mass Transfer Operations
This course covers the analysis and design of chemical processes for the separation and purification of mixtures. The course will include an introduction to the fundamentals of diffusion
and the analogies between heat and mass transfer, leading up to mass transfer coefficients and
their use in solving a variety of engineering problems. Design methodologies will be examined
for equilibrium based processes (such as absorption, stripping, and distillation). Equilibrium
versus rate-based processes will be analyzed, including examination of packed columns and
batch adsorption. (Prerequisites: CHME-230 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
CHME-340 
Reaction Engineering
The fundamentals of chemical kinetics are integrated with the concepts of mass and energy
conservation, from both a macroscopic and microscopic perspective, to develop models that
describe the performance of chemical reactors. Topics include mass action kinetics and absolute rate theory, series and parallel reaction systems, and the mathematical modeling of various
reactor configurations. The conceptual framework and tools are developed to understand and
design chemical reactor processes and to interpret experimental data obtained on a laboratory
scale to design pilot scale and full scale manufacturing processes. (Prerequisites: CHME-230
and MATH-231 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
CHME-350 
Multiple Scale Material Science
This course gives students fundamental background in the atomic and molecular structures of
engineering materials and how they can be manipulated. The physical and chemical foundations of the thermal, electrical and optical properties of engineering materials are studied. The
effect of fabrication on structure/material properties is examined, as well as criteria to select
appropriate materials for engineering applications. A summary of nanomaterial properties
and the prevalent methods of synthesis will also be highlighted. (Prerequisites: CHME-310 and
CHMO-231 and CHMO-235 and CHMI-351 and CHME-499 or equivalent courses.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHME-391 
Chemical Engineering Principles Lab
Students are introduced to basic equipment and methodologies for designing laboratory experiments, measuring results, interpreting data, and drawing objective conclusions. Students work
in teams to design experimental procedures, identify lab equipment, and assemble simple apparatus to achieve specific experimental goals. (Prerequisite: CHME-230 or equivalent course.
Co-requisite: CHME-320 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 2 (Spring)
CHME-401 
System Dynamics and Control
The dynamic behavior of chemical process components is examined. The mathematics of
Laplace transforms are examined extensively as a fundamental underpinning of control theory.
Block diagrams, feedback control systems, and stability analysis are introduced. (Prerequisites:
CHME-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHME-421 
Interfacial Phenomena
This course will cover the fundamental principles of interfacial phenomena incorporating
unique physics and chemistry associated with interfaces arising between liquids, gases, and
solids. It is designed to introduce students to the significance of interfacial science in important engineering applications such as the wetting behavior of liquids on solid surfaces, the
coating of thin liquid films, the formation of dispersed phases, and colloid & nanoparticle
technology. (Prerequisites: CHMG-141 and CHME-310 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
CHME-422 
Introduction to Applied Rheology
Complex fluids encountered in manufacturing, commercial products, and in nature, such as
polymer solutions and melts, blood and other biological fluids, foams, slurries and emulsions,
exhibit complex flow behaviors called non-Newtonian because they are not exhibited by lowmolecular-weight fluids like air and water. Rheology is the study of deformation and flow.
Rheological phenomena, their connection to fluid microstructure, and the characterization of
complex fluids using commercial instruments and constitutive equations are introduced. This
foundation is applied to elements of materials processing including flow and heat transfer in
tubes and in boundary layers, mixing, and the drag of liquid on particles. Specialized manufacturing methods such as extrusion and the pumps and mixers required for these fluids are
covered. (Prerequisites: CHME-301 and CHME-321 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

CHME-431 
Advanced Separation Processes
This advanced-level course builds on concepts taught in CHME-330 Mass Transfer Operations.
Topics to be covered include adsorption, membrane separation, extraction, and crystallization. Transient systems will be introduced and analyzed to augment steady-state analyses from
CHME-330. Differential analyses of mass transfer will be presented to understand molecular
level transport phenomena. Case studies will be examined to connect fundamental concepts
to real world applications (Prerequisites: CHME-330 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses or
permission of instructor.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHME-451 
Analysis of MultiScale Processes
This course examines the use of larger scale chemical engineering processes to control and
manipulate microscale phenomena. In an introductory topic, human physiology is examined as
a prototypical multi-scale process, and biometric principles are discussed. Langmuir-Blodgett
film generation, thin-film breakup and draining, chemical vapor deposition, emulsion based
reaction processes to create nano-particles, flow systems involving colloids, porous media flows
and membrane separations, and controlled patterning via molecular self assembly are among
processes examined. (Prerequisites: CHME-321 and CHME-330 and CHME-340 and CHME350 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHME-489 
Special Topics
Topics and subject areas that are not among the courses listed here are frequently offered
under the special topics title. Under the same title also may be found experimental courses that
may be offered for the first time. Such courses are offered in a formal format; that is, regularly
scheduled class sessions with an instructor. The level of complexity is commensurate with a
senior-level undergraduate technical course. (Prerequisites: CHME-321 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHME-490 
Design with Constraint
This course examines typical constraints on design and their integration with technology.
Economics, environmental considerations, hazards analysis, ethics, and globalization and
supply chain management ideas are among the concepts introduced. Modern examples that
integrate knowledge of unit operations and processes with design constraints are examined.
(Co-requisites: CHME-451 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHME-491 
Chemical Engineering Processes Lab
This course extends the laboratory experience from the previous Chemical Engineering
Principles Lab, and focuses on unit operations common to engineering practice. Students
work in teams to design experimental procedures on existing equipment, and to in some cases, manipulate experimental apparatus to achieve specific experimental goals. (Prerequisites:
CHME-391 and CHME-499 or equivalent courses. Co-requisites: CHME-340 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Credits 2 (Fall)
CHME-492 
Advanced Design Capstone
Students work in teams to design and simulate a realistic chemical manufacturing plant. An
assigned project requires students to draw on, and integrate, knowledge from all core chemical engineering courses taken over the previous 5 years. The course is taught in the chemical
engineering computer lab and makes extensive use of both chemical process simulation software (ChemCad), software for drawing piping and instrumentation diagrams (P&ID’s) as
well as online resources that chemical engineers use to size and select parts and equipment.
(Prerequisites: CHME-490 or equivalent course.) Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHME-499 Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in chemical engineering. Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
CHME-599 
Independent Study
Allows upper-level undergraduate students an opportunity to independently investigate, under
faculty supervision, aspects of the field of chemical engineering that are not sufficiently covered in existing courses. Proposals for independent study activities must be approved by both
the faculty member supervising the independent study and the department head. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

Computer Engineering
CMPE-110 
Introduction to Computer Engineering
This course overviews the field of computer engineering and provides an appreciation of the
computer engineering curriculum. Fundamental concepts of computers, computing and engineering design are introduced. Topics include basic circuits, number systems, digital logic,
computer organization, programming in the Matlab environment, teamwork, communication
skills, ethics and professionalism, historical background and global, societal and environmental
issues related to computers. Lab exercises familiarize students with lab equipment, experiments
and data analysis. Lab, Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)

	

CMPE-160 
Digital System Design I
The course covers the specification, analysis, and design of basic digital systems, including the
design of combinational and sequential circuits using basic logic components: AND, OR, INV,
NAND, NOR, and XOR. Standard modules, such as decoders, multiplexers, shifter registers,
adders, and counters, will be analyzed. Lectures will discuss fundamental design methodologies using Karnaugh Maps as well as Mealy and Moore state machines. The laboratory provides
hands-on experiences of the design, implementation, and testing of digital systems using SSI,
MSI, and FPGA components as well as CAD tools. (Prerequisites: CMPE-110 or EEEE-105 or
EGEN-100 or equivalent courses or a declared computer engineering minor (CMPE-MN).
Co-requisite: CSCI-140 or CSCI-141 or CSCI-105 or 4003-242 or equivalent course.) Lab,
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-161 
Introduction to VHDL
This course presents different approaches to digital system modeling and design with the use of
VHDL. The lab sessions include specification and design of combinational and sequential systems. Industry-standard simulation tools will be used in the course, which will enable students
gain hands-on experience. (Prerequisites: EEEE-120 or equivalent course.Co-requisites: CSCI141 or CSCI-140 or CSCI-105 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-240 
Engineering Fundamentals of Computer Sys
This course introduces the computer engineering fundamentals upon which current computer systems are based. Discussion of the machine-level representation of data, Boolean algebra
and simple logic circuits describes the hardware foundations for modern computer systems.
An introduction to instruction set design and assembly language provides the student with
an understanding of the interface between hardware and software. The course concludes by
discussing high-level architectural design and networking emphasizing its effect on program
performance. (Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or 1055-265) and (CSCI-140, CSCI-142 or CSCI-242
or 4003-243) or equivalent courses.) Lab 2, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-250 
Assembly Language Programming
Introduction to fundamental computer organization, assembly language programming, and
input/output techniques of a microprocessor system, as well as embedded programming concepts and interface modules. Covers addressing methods, machine instructions, assembler
directives, macro definitions, relocatability, subroutine linkage, data-structures, I/O programming, exception processing, and interrupts. Program design techniques necessary to write
efficient, maintainable device drivers are considered. The Freescale Kinetis L microcontroller
family of devices based on the ARM Cortex-M0+ core and Keil Microcontroller Development
Kit are used in most class examples and all required programming projects. (Prerequisites:
(CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003-243) and CMPE-160 or CMPE-161 or equivalent
courses.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-260 
Digital System Design II
This course presents modern approaches to the design, modeling and testing of digital system. Topics covered are: VHDL and Verilog HDL as hardware description languages (HDLs),
simulation techniques, design synthesis, verification methods, and implementation with field
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). Combinational and both the synchronous and asynchronous sequential circuits are studied. Testing and design for testability techniques are
emphasized and fault tolerant and fail safe design concepts are introduced. Laboratory projects that enable students gain hands-on experience are required. The projects include complete
design flow: design of the system, modeling using HDLs, simulation, synthesis and verification. (Prerequisites: CMPE-160 or CMPE-161 and PHYS-212 or PHYS-208 and PHYS-209 or
EEEE-281 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-350 
Computer Organization
Provides an understanding of the information transfer and transformations that occur in a
computer, with emphasis on the relations between computer architecture and organization.
Topics include design levels and their respective primitives, modules and descriptive media,
register transfer and micro-operations, basic computer organization and design, central
processor organization, control unit and microprogramming, memory organization, inputoutput organization, computer architecture defining the hardware/software interface, and from
architecture to organization (one to many). (Prerequisites: CMPE-250 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-380 
Applied Programming
An introduction to classical algorithms used in the solution of numerical problems encountered in science and engineering. The C language will be introduced as a tool for implementing
these algorithms. Topics include an introduction to C, computer number representation and
roundoff error, algorithms for finding roots of nonlinear equations, interpolation, numerical
differentiation and integration, function approximation and data fitting solutions to systems
of linear equations, and general matrix manipulation. (Prerequisites: MATH-231 and MATH241 and (CSCI-140 or CSCI-142 or CSCI-242 or 4003-243) or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

41

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

CMPE-460 
Interface and Digital Electronics
This course will cover various sensors, signal conditioning circuits including amplification,
filtering, level shifting, ADC and DAC. Modern CAD tools such as CodeWarrior, Pspice will be
used to simulate and debug Freescale micro-controllers, and analog active filters, and operational amplifier application circuits. Each team of two students are required to design a complete
data acquisition system from sensors, amplification, filtering, ADC and DAC to analog outputs
through either wired transmission or wireless transmission circuits. (Prerequisites: EEEE-381
and CMPE-250 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-480 
Digital Signal Processing
This course introduces the basic elements of continuous and discrete time signals and systems and fundamental signal processing techniques, such as FIR and IIR Filtering, the Fourier
transform, the Discrete Fourier transform and the z transform. Theory is strengthened through
MATLAB-based projects and exercises. (Prerequisites: CMPE-380 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-489 
Special Topics
Topics and subject areas that are not among the courses listed here are frequently offered
under the special topics title. Under the same title also may be found experimental courses that
may be offered for the first time. Such courses are offered in a formal format; that is, regularly
scheduled class sessions with an instructor. The level of complexity is commensurate with a
senior-level undergraduate technical course. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-495 
Computer Engineering Senior Projects I
The first part of a capstone undergraduate design projects course in computer engineering.
Lecture materials include real-time programming techniques, patents and intellectual property, a brief introduction to project management techniques, and formulating major capstone
project proposals. Students undertake individual independent investigations of team project
subsystems deemed to be of the highest risk to successful project completion. This first course
ends at the formulation of a detailed proposal for a reasonably complex multidisciplinary
design project to be completed during the concluding course. (Prerequisites: CMPE-460 and at
least 4th year standing in CMPE-BS with a minimum of 2 terms of co-op completed.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-496 
Computer Engineering Senior Projects II
The conclusion of a capstone undergraduate design projects course in computer engineering. Students will have prepared for the major course project during the previous course and
will have done some detailed project analysis over the intervening co-op work period. This
course begins with project design reviews presented to the class and selected faculty members.
Project performance analysis and reliability will be major metrics. Engineering ethics topics
will also be presented. Students will prepare detailed project reports on a department web site.
(Prerequisite: CMPE-495 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-497 
Multidisciplinary Senior Design I
This is the first half of a two-semester design course oriented to the solution of engineering problems. The mission is to enhance engineering education through a capstone design
experience that integrates engineering theory, principles and processes within a collaborative
environment. Working in multidisciplinary teams and following an engineering design process, students will assess customer needs and engineering specifications, evaluate concepts,
resolve major technical hurdles, and employ rigorous engineering principles to design a prototype which is fully tested and documented. (Prerequisites: CMPE-460 and at least 4th year
standing in CMPE-BS with a minimum of 2 terms of co-op completed.) Lecture 2, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-498 
Multidisciplinary Senior Design II
This is the conclusion of the capstone sequence. Students will have prepared for a major project
in the previous term. The course begins with design reviews. Project performance, analysis and
reliability are major metrics. Engineering ethics are also discussed. Students prepare a detailed
report for inclusion on department website. (Prerequisite: CMPE-497 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-499 Co-op
After completing Co-op Seminar (EGEN-099)or Co-op Workshop as well as meeting Co-op
enrollment requirements, Computer Engineering students should register for CMPE-499 for
each term of full-time, paid employment in the Computer Engineering field. Students who take
on Spring-Summer or Summer-Fall Co-ops must register for both the semester term and the
summer term. Students must obtain permission from the Computer Engineering office for any
exception to the assigned Co-op blocks. (This class is restricted to CMPE-BS students with at
least 3rd year standing who have completed EGEN-99, EEEE-281, SWEN-261 and CMPE-260
or CMPE-499.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

42	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CMPE-530 
Digital Integrated Circuit Design
This course will cover the basic theory and techniques of Digital Integrated Circuit Design in
CMOS technology. Topics include CMOS transistor theory and operation, design and implementation of CMOS circuits, fabrication process, layout and physical design, delay and power
models, static and dynamic logic families, testing and verification, memory and nanoscale
technologies. Laboratory assignments and project facilitate in hands-on learning of circuitlevel design and simulation, layout and parasitic extractions, pre and post-layout verification
and validation, full-custom flow and Synthesis based flow, using industry standard CAD tools.
(Prerequisites: CMPE-260 and EEEE-381 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)
CMPE-540 
Control Systems
Provides a comprehensive introduction to the basic theory and essential techniques for analysis
and design of linear control systems and their digital implementation using transform methods and frequency response approaches. MATLAB, Control System Toolbox and SIMLINK
are utilized for analysis, design and simulations. (Prerequisites: MATH-231 and CMPE-480
or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CMPE-550 
Computer Architecture
The course covers various aspects of advanced uniprocessor computer architecture design.
Instruction set architecture design alternatives are discussed with emphasis on the Reduced
Instruction Set Computer (RISC) architecture. Techniques to enhance CPU performance such
as pipelined execution optimizations, conditional branch handling techniques, exploitation of
instruction-level parallelism, multiple-instruction issue and dynamic scheduling are studied.
Cache, and memory hierarchy design and performance issues are also presented. The design
aspects of efficient and reliable input/output systems are also covered. (Prerequisite: CMPE350 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-570 
Data and Communication Networks
This course will give an overview of the technologies, architectures and protocols used to build
various types of computer and communication networks - wired or wireless. The emphasis
will be placed on discussions of various network design problems and solution approaches.
Specific issues covered in this course include: framing and coding, error detection, multiple
access control, addressing, routing, flow and congestion control, scheduling and switching.
(Prerequisites: MATH-251 or 1016-345 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMPE-599 
Independent Study
Allows upper-level undergraduate students an opportunity to independently investigate, under
faculty supervision, aspects of the field of computer engineering that are not sufficiently covered in existing courses. Proposals for independent study activities must be approved by both
the faculty member supervising the independent study and the department head. Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

Electrical Engineering
EEEE-105 
Freshman Practicum
Introduction to the practice of electrical engineering including understanding laboratory practice, identifying electronic components, operating generic electronic instruments, building
an electronic circuit (Wein Bridge oscillator), measuring and capturing an electronic waveform, schematic entry, modeling, and simulation of an electronic circuit (SPICE or equivalent),
analyzing a waveform using a commercial software package (MATLAB), and building and
studying an amplitude modulation radio receiver. This studio style lab course emphasizes a
learn-by-doing approach to introduce the student to electrical engineering design practices
and tools used throughout the undergraduate program and professional career. Each student
will prototype and build a functioning electronic circuit. Lab, Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-220 
Digital Systems II
In the first part, the course covers the design of digital systems using a hardware description
language. In the second part, it covers the design of large digital systems using the computer design methodology, and culminates with the design of a reduced instruction set central
processing unit, associated memory and input/output peripherals. The course focuses on the
design, capture, simulation, and verification of major hardware components such as: the datapath, the control unit, the central processing unit, the system memory, and the I/O modules.
The lab sessions enforce and complement the concepts and design principles exposed in the
lecture through the use of CAD tools and emulation in a commercial FPGA. This course assumes
a background in C programming. (Prerequisites: (EEEE-120 or 0306-341) and CMPR-271 or
equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

EEEE-221 
Clean and Renewable Energy Systems and Sources
This course covers the first principles and fundamentals of clean and renewable energy systems and sources. Various quantum-mechanical and electromagnetic devices and systems will
be analyzed, designed and examined using software and CAD tools. Topics include: geothermal, hydro, nuclear, solar, wind, and other energy sources. Societal, ethical, economical, and
environmental aspects of nanotechnology-enabled clean energy and power are also discussed.
(Corequisite: PHYS-212 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
EEEE-222 
Introduction to Wireless Communication
This course provides an introduction to the broad field of Wireless Communications and
its applications. The course covers fundamental concepts from a systems perspective and
familiarizes students with modern systems, applications and standards enabled by wireless
communications. The course starts with an overview of the history of wireless communications and challenges in providing a reliable wireless data link. Afterwards, tools for link budget
analysis and design are learned and applied to practical scenarios. Assessment of reliability
follows using bit error rate curves and outage analysis. The course then diverges to address
location based services (GPS), cellular telephony (CDMA and GSM networks), remote internet
access (WiFi, LTE, WiMAX), standards for consumer electronics (Bluetooth, Zigbee), Wireless
LAN, and sensor networks and their applications for environmental monitoring and medical
services. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-252 
Principles of Digital Systems
This course introduces the basic components and methodologies used in digital systems design.
The laboratory component consists of a small design, implement, and debug project. Topics
include: Boolean algebra, synthesis and analysis of combinational logic circuits, arithmetic circuits, memory elements, synthesis and analysis of sequential logic circuits, finite state machines,
and data transfers. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students in the Kate Gleason
College of Engineering.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Spring, Summer)
EEEE-253 
Principles of Linear Systems
This course introduces the principles of continuous and discrete signal and system analysis.
Topics include a description of continuous linear systems via differential equations, a description of discrete systems via difference equations, input-output relationship of continuous and
discrete linear systems, the continuous time convolution integral, the discrete time convolution sum, exponential and trigonometric forms of Fourier series and their properties, sampling
of continuous time signals, and the Laplace, Z and DTFT. The solution of circuit problems
using Laplace transforms, transfer functions of physical systems, system frequency response
are presented. Finally, an introduction to the design of analog and digital filters is introduced.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
EEEE-260 
Introduction to Semiconductor Devices
An introductory course on the fundamentals of semiconductor physics and principles of operation of basic devices. Topics include semiconductor fundamentals (crystal structure, statistical
physics of carrier concentration, motion in crystals, energy band models, drift and diffusion
currents) as well as the operation of pn junction diodes, bipolar junction transistors (BJT),
metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitors and MOS field-effect transistors. (Prerequisites:
PHYS-212 or PHYS-208 and 209 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-282 
Circuits II
This course covers the fundamentals of AC circuit analysis starting with the study of sinusoidal steady-state solutions for circuits in the time domain. The complex plane is introduced
along with the concepts of complex exponential functions, phasors, impedances and admittances. Nodal, loop and mesh methods of analysis as well as Thevenin and related theorems
are applied to the complex plane. The concept of complex power is developed. The analysis
of mutual induction as applied to coupled-coils. Linear, ideal and non-ideal transformers are
introduced. Complex frequency analysis is introduced to enable discussion of transfer functions, frequency dependent behavior, Bode plots, resonance phenomenon and simple filter
circuits. Two-port network theory is developed and applied to circuits and interconnections.
(Prerequisites: EEEE-281 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EEEE-321 
Energy Conversion
This course covers: 1) the first principles and fundamentals of energy conversion: 2) The
fundamentals of electromechanical, related electromagnetic topics, electric variables and electromagnetic forces. The basic concepts of energy conversion systems, DC electric machines,
induction & synchronous electric machines (motors & generators) used in power systems,
automotive, industrial, robotics and other applications are presented. The theory of energy
conversion and electromechanical motion devices are covered. (Prerequisites: EEEE-282 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

EEEE-346 
Advanced Programming
Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming in C++. Topics will be review of C (control
structures, functions, and arrays), pointers, classes, operator overloading, inheritance, polymorphism, data structures, class string, and STL. At the end of the semester, everyone will
have the working knowledge of C++. Projects will be assigned to build your C++ programming skills. (Prerequisites: CMPR-271 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-353 
Linear Systems
Linear Systems provides the foundations of continuous and discrete signal and system analysis
and modeling. Topics include a description of continuous linear systems via differential equations, a description of discrete systems via difference equations, input-output relationship of
continuous and discrete linear systems, the continuous time convolution integral, the discrete
time convolution sum, application of convolution principles to system response calculations,
exponential and trigonometric forms of Fourier series and their properties, Fourier transforms
including energy spectrum and energy spectral density. Sampling of continuous time signals
and the sampling theorem, the Laplace, Z and DTFT. The solution of differential equations and
circuit analysis problems using Laplace transforms, transfer functions of physical systems, block
diagram algebra and transfer function realization is also covered. A comprehensive study of
the z transform and its inverse, which includes system transfer function concepts, system frequency response and its interpretation, and the relationship of the z transform to the Fourier
and Laplace transform is also covered. Finally, an introduction to the design of digital filters,
which includes filter block diagrams for Finite Impulse Response (FIR) and Infinite Impulse
Response (IIR) filters is introduced. (Prerequisites: EEEE-282 and MATH-231 and CMPR-271
or equvalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-381 
Electronics I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence in analog electronic circuit design. The course
covers the following topics: (1) Basic MOSFET current-voltage characteristics; (2) DC and
small-signal analysis and design of Metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) devices and circuits,
including single-stage MOS amplifier configurations; (3) DC biasing circuits, such as basic
current sources and current mirrors; (4) Two-transistor amplifier stages, such as differential amplifiers, cascode amplifiers, and output stages; (5) Analysis and design of multistage
amplifiers; (6) Frequency response of single and multistage amplifiers; (7) Semiconductor
diodes and diode circuits, including rectifying and clamping circuits, as well as Zener diodebased voltage regulation; (8) Ideal operational amplifier (op amp) circuits in non-inverting
and inverting configurations. (Prerequisites: EEEE-281 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EEEE-414 
Classical Control
This course introduces students to the study of linear continuous-time classical control systems,
their behavior, design, and use in augmenting engineering system performance. The course is
based on classical control methods using Laplace-transforms, block-diagrams, root-locus, and
frequency-domain analysis. Topics include: Laplace-transform review; Bode plot review; system
modeling for control; relationships of transfer-function poles and zeros to time-response behaviors; stability analysis; steady-state error, error constants, and error specification; feedback
control properties; relationships between stability margins and transient behavior; lead, lag, and
PID control; root-locus analysis and design; frequency-response design and Nyquist stability. A
laboratory will provide students with hands-on analysis and design-build-test experience, and
includes the use of computer-aided design software such as MATLAB. (Prerequisites: EEEE353 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-420 
Embedded Systems Design
The purpose of this course is to expose students to both the hardware and the software components of a digital embedded system. It focuses on the boundary between hardware and software
operations. Students will learn about a computer system from various abstraction levels from
the digital logic gates to software applications. This course will also provide a solid foundation
in computer systems architecture. The course focuses on the major hardware components
such as: datapaths, the control unit, the central processing unit, the system memory, the I/O
modules and on instruction set architectures. The lab sessions will cover the design, simulation
and implementation of a 4-bit microprocessor core. (Prerequisites: EEEE-220 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-421 
Electric Power Transmission and Distribution
This course deals with the topics related to electric power transmission and distribution.
Topics covered in this course include: Three Phase System — Wye and Delta connections,
Transformers — equivalent circuit-performance characteristics, Balanced and Unbalanced
System Analysis, Transmission and Distribution Line Design Considerations, Transmission
Line Protection, Transmission Line Faults and Fault Analysis. (Prerequisites: EEEE-321 or
equivalent course.EEEE-321 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

43

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

EEEE-422 
Advances in Power Systems
This course deals with improvements that can be made in the use of electric power that would
result in better use of the available resources. Topics include adjustments of power tariffs, study
of the load demand variations during the day, the use of smart sensors and meters to monitor
real and reactive power usage, improve the efficiency of power transmission and the integration of renewable sources such as wind and solar into the grid. (Prerequisites: EEEE-421 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

EEEE-489 
Special Topics
Topics and subject areas that are not among the courses listed here are frequently offered
under the special topics title. Under the same title also may be found experimental courses that
may be offered for the first time. Such courses are offered in a formal format; that is, regularly
scheduled class sessions with an instructor. The level of complexity is commensurate with a
senior-level undergraduate technical course. (Enrollment in this course requires permission
from the department offering the course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

EEEE-450 
Introduction to Matlab Procedural Programming
This course introduces the principles of Matlab through the use of examples problems and a
hands-on learning approach. Matlab topics include: Matlab online help, Matlab basic function
usage, matrix manipulation, polynomials, programming loops (for/while), operators, logical
operations, conditional flow control (if-then statements), programming Matlab (m-files), data
import/export, plotting graphic routines, data analysis, custom functions, differential equation
solutions, optimization, Fourier transforms, systems modeling, introduction to external interfaces. Several systems-level examples are presented. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students in the Kate Gleason College of Engineering.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)

EEEE-497 
Senior Design Project I
MSD-I is the first half of a two-semester design course oriented to the solution of engineering problems. The mission is to enhance engineering education through a capstone design
experience that integrates engineering theory, principles and processes within a collaborative
environment. Working in multidisciplinary teams and following an engineering design process, students will assess customer needs and engineering specifications, evaluate concepts,
resolve major technical hurdles, and employ rigorous engineering principles to design a prototype which is fully tested and documented. (Prerequisites: EEEE-414 and EEEE-482 and two
co-ops (EEEE-499).) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

EEEE-451 
Introduction To Simulink and Embedded Systems
This course introduces the principles of Simulink through the use of examples problems and
a hands-on learning approach. Simulink topics include: creating a model file, basic block
manipulation, interface with Matlab, modeling and solutions of systems, creating subsystems, S-functions, custom blocks. Several systems-level examples are presented. Introduction
to embedded system programming with microprocessors focusing on measuring input, manipulating data, and controlling output. (Prerequisites: EEEE-450 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 2 (Spring)

EEEE-498 
Senior Design Project II
MSD-II is the second half of a two-semester design course oriented to the solution of engineering problems. The mission is to enhance engineering education through a capstone design
experience that integrates engineering theory, principles and processes within a collaborative
environment. Working in multidisciplinary teams and following an engineering design process, students will assess customer needs and engineering specifications, evaluate concepts,
resolve major technical hurdles, and employ rigorous engineering principles to design a prototype which is fully tested and documented. (Prerequisites: EEEE-497 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

EEEE-482 
Electronics II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence in analog and digital electronic circuit analysis and design. The analog portion of the course covers the following topics: (1) DC and small
signal analysis and design of bipolar junction transistor (BJT) circuits; (2) BJT DC biasing circuits; (3) Simple and compound BJT amplifier stages; (4) Analysis and design of BJT multi-stage
amplifiers and op-amps; (5) Frequency response of BJT-based single and multi-stage amplifiers; (6) Feedback and stability in BJT and MOSFET amplifiers. The digital portion of the course
covers the essential concepts and applications of digital electronic circuits implemented ins
NMOS and CMOS technologies. Topics include the following: (7) static and dynamic behavior of NMOS and CMOS inverters; (8) combinational and sequential CMOS logic networks;
(9) dynamic CMOS logic networks, including precharge-evaluate, domino and transmission
gate techniques; (10) special topics, including static and dynamic MOS memory and lowpower logic. (Prerequisites: EEEE-282 and EEEE-381 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-483 Mechatronics
Fundamental principles of electric machines are covered. Sensors and actuators are studied.
The primary actuators discussed are high-performance electromechanical motion devices such
as permanent-magnet DC, synchronous and stepper motors. Topics in power electronics and
control of electromechanical systems are studied. High-performance MATLAB environment
is used to simulate, analyze and control mechatronic systems. Application of digital signal
processors and microcontrollers in mechatronics are introduced. Case studies are covered.
(Prerequisties: EEEE-374 and EEEE-414 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-484 
Communication Systems
Introduction to Communication Systems provides the basics of the formation, transmission
and reception of information over communication channels. Spectral density and correlation
descriptions for deterministic and stationary random signals. Amplitude and angle modulation methods (e.g. AM and FM) for continuous signals. Carrier detection and synchronization.
Phase-locked loop and its application. Introduction to digital communication. Binary ASK, FSK
and PSK. Noise effects. Optimum detection: matched filters, maximum-likelihood reception.
Computer simulation. (Prerequisites: EEEE-353 and (MATH-251 or 1016-345) or equivalent
course.) Lab 2, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-485 
Robotic Systems
This course will cover basic electrical and mechanical engineering topics related to Robotics,
including but not limited to: basic electrical and electronics components (resistors, capacitors,
inductors, diodes, transistors, op-amps, timers) and concepts (sensors, signal conditioning,
oscillators) and basic mechanical components (chains, gears, ratchets and pawl belt and chain
drives, bearing) and concepts (motion, dynamics equations, and force and torque analysis). In
addition, robotics system modeling, control, and applications will be explored. Students will
design electronic interfaces and controllers for mechanical devices. Finally, sensor and actuator selection, installation, and application strategies will be explored. (Prerequisites: EEEE-346
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

44	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

EEEE-499 Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in electrical engineering. (EEEE-BS) Co-op, Credits 0
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
EEEE-505 
Modern Optics for Engineers
This course provides a broad overview of modern optics in preparation for more advanced
courses in the rapidly developing fields of optical fiber communications, image processing,
super-resolution imaging, optical properties of materials, and novel optical materials. Topics
covered: geometrical optics, propagation of light, diffraction, interferometry, Fourier optics,
optical properties of materials, polarization and liquid crystals, and fiber optics. In all topics,
light will be viewed as signals that carry information (data) in the time or spatial domain. After
taking this course, the students should have a firm foundation in classical optics. (Prerequisite:
EEEE-374 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-510 
Analog Electronics
This is a foundation course in analog integrated electronic circuit design and is a perquisite
for the graduate courses in analog integrated circuit design EEEE-726 and EEEE-730. The
course covers the following topics: (1)CMOS Technology (2) CMOS active and passive element
models (3) Noise mechanisms and circuit noise analysis (4) Current mirrors (5) Differential
amplifiers, cascode amplifiers (6) Multistage amps and common mode feedback (7) Stability
analysis of feedback amplifiers; (8) Advanced current mirrors, amplifiers, and comparators (9)
Band gap and translinear cells (10) Matching. (Prerequisites: EEEE-260 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
EEEE-512 
Advanced Semiconductor Devices
This is an advanced undergraduate course in semiconductor electronics and device physics.
The course covers the following topics: (1) Bipolar junction transistor (BJT) fundamentals;
(2) Advanced BJT topics; (3) Metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET)
fundamentals; (4) Advanced MOSFET topics. (Prerequisites: EEEE-260 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
EEEE-520 
Design of Digital Systems
The purpose of this course is to expose students to complete, custom design of a CMOS digital system. It emphasizes equally analytical and CAD based design methodologies, starting
at the highest level of abstraction (RTL, front-end)), and down to the physical implementation level (back-end). In the lab students learn how to capture a design using both schematic
and hardware description languages, how to synthesize a design, and how to custom layout a
design. Testing, debugging, and verification strategies are formally introduced in the lecture,
and practically applied in the lab projects. (Prerequisites: EEEE-420 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

EEEE-521 
Design of Computer Systems
The purpose of this course is to expose students to the design of single and multicore computer
systems. The lectures cover the design principles of instructions set architectures, non-pipelined data paths, control unit, pipelined data paths, hierarchical memory (cache), and multicore
processors. The design constraints and the interdependencies of computer systems building
blocks are being presented. The operation of single core, multicore, vector, VLIW, and EPIC
processors is explained. In the first half of the semester, the lab projects enforce the material presented in the lectures through the design and physical emulation of a pipelined, single
core processor. This is then being used in the second half of the semester to create a multicore
computer system. The importance of hardware & software co-design is emphasized throughout the course. (Prerequisites: EEEE-420 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

EEEE-547 
Artificial Intelligence Explorations
The course will start with the history of artificial intelligence and its development over the
years. There have been many attempts to define and generate artificial intelligence. As a result
of these attempts, many artificial intelligence techniques have been developed and applied to
solve real life problems. This course will explore variety of artificial intelligence techniques, and
their applications and limitations. Some of the AI techniques to be covered in this course are
intelligent agents, problem-solving, knowledge and reasoning, uncertainty, decision making,
learning (Neural networks and Bayesian networks), reinforcement learning, swarm intelligence, Genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization, applications in robotics, controls, and
communications. Students are expected to have any of the following programming skills listed
above. Students will write an IEEE conference paper. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

EEEE-525 
Lab Applications in Mechatronics
This course provides a culminating experience for the mechatronics engineering certificate,
relying upon the completed course work and culminating in development of laboratory experiences related to mechatronics. Students enrolled in the course will design and prepare a novel
lab experiment and complete lab experiments created by peers. (Prerequisites: EEEE-451 or
equivalent course.) Lab 1, Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)

EEEE-579 
Analog Filter Design
A study of the various techniques for the design of filters to meet the given specifications. The
emphasis is on the design of active filters using op amps. The following topics are discussed
in detail: Review of transfer functions, Bode diagrams and the analysis of op amp circuits;
ideal filter characteristics, approximations to the ideal filter using Butterworth, Chebyshev
and Bessel-Thompson polynomials; standard filter stages; magnitude and frequency scaling;
low-pass filter design; design of high-pass, band-pass and band-reject filters; passive ladder
filter network design; frequency dependent negative resistance networks; switched capacitor
filters. (Prerequisites: EEEE-482 and EEEE-353 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

EEEE-530 
Biomedical Instrumentation
Study of fundamental principles of electronic instrumentation and design consideration associated with biomedical measurements and monitoring. Topics to be covered include biomedical
signals and transducer principles, instrumentation system fundamentals and electrical safety
considerations, amplifier circuits and design for analog signal processing and conditioning of
physiological voltages and currents as well as basic data conversion and processing technology.
Laboratory experiments involving instrumentation circuit design and test will be conducted.
(Prerequisites: EEEE-381 or equivalent course. Corequisites: EEEE-482 or equivalent course.
EEEE-381 Prerq & EEEE-482 Corq) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-531 
Biomedical Sensors and Transducers I
Biological entities represent one of the most difficult environments in which to obtain or generate accurate and reliable signals. This course will discuss the techniques, mechanisms and
methods necessary to transfer accurate and reliable information or signals with a biological target. Various biomedical sensor and transducer types including their characteristics, advantages,
disadvantages and signal conditioning will be covered. Discussions will include the challenges
associated with providing a reliable and reproducible interface to a biological entity, the nature
and characteristics of the associated signals, the types of applicable sensors and transducers
and the circuitry necessary to drive them. (Prerequisites: EEEE-482 and EEEE-353 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
EEEE-532 
Fundamental Electrophysiology
Investigation and study of the concepts and underlying mechanisms associated with electrical
signals in mammalian biology and physiology with a significant emphasis on methods, techniques and understanding of electrical potential distribution and current flow derived from
circuit analysis. Intended to provide engineers with insight into the relationship between the
study of electricity and its applicability to a wide variety of physiological mechanisms ranging
from intracellular communication and control to cognitive function and bodily movement.
Successful completion of the course will require generation of a significantly in-depth analysis
report on some electrophysiological phenomenon or mechanism. (Prerequisites: EEEE-281 and
EEEE-374 and MEDS-251 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-536 Biorobotics/Cybernetics
Cybernetics refers to the science of communication and control theory that is concerned especially with the comparative study of automatic control systems (as in the nervous system and
brain and mechanical- electrical communications systems). This course will present material
related to the study of cybernetics as well as the aspects of robotics and controls associated
with applications of a biological nature. Topics will also include the study of various paradigms
and computational methods that can be utilized to achieve the successful integration of robotic
mechanisms in a biological setting. Successful participation in the course will entail completion
of at least one project involving incorporation of these techniques in a biomedical application.
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-546 
Power Electronics
The course involves the study of the circuits and devices used in the control and conversion of
power. Devices include diodes, BJTs, power MOSFETS, IGBTs and thyristors. Power conversion includes rectifiers (ac-dc) , dc-dc, ac-ac and inverters (dc-ac). DC circuit topologies include
Buck Converter, Boost Converter, Buck-Boost Converter, and the Cuk converter. (Prerequisites:
EEEE-482 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

EEEE-585 
Principles of Robotics
An introduction to a wide range of robotics-related topics, including but not limited to sensors,
interface design, robot devices applications, mobile robots, intelligent navigation, task planning,
coordinate systems and positioning image processing, digital signal processing applications
on robots, and controller circuitry design. Pre-requisite for the class is a basic understanding
of signals and systems, matrix theory, and computer programming. Software assignments
will be given to the students in robotic applications. Students will prepare a project, in which
they will complete software or hardware design of an industrial or mobile robot. There will
be a two-hour lab additional to the lectures. (Prerequisites: EEEE-353 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
EEEE-587 
MEMS Evaluation
This course focuses on evaluation of MEMS, microsystems and microelectromechanical
motion devices utilizing MEMS testing and characterization. Evaluations are performed
using performance evaluation matrices, comprehensive performance analysis and functionality. Applications of advanced software and hardware in MEMS evaluation will be covered.
(Prerequisites: EEEE-260 and EEEE-482 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-592 
Communication Networks
This course covers communication networks in general and the internet in particular. Topics
include layers service models, circuit and packet switching, queuing, pipelining, routing, packet
loss and more. A five-layer model is assumed and the top four levels are covered in a topdown approach: starting with the application layer, going down through the transport layer
to the network layer and finally the data link layer. Emphasis is placed on wireless networks
and network security. (Prerequisites: MATH-251 or 1016-345 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
EEEE-593 
Digital Data Communication
Principles and practices of modern digital data communication systems. Topics include pulse
code transmission and error probabilities, M-ary signaling and performance, AWGN channels,
band-limited and distorting channels, filter design, equalizers, optimal detection for channels
with memory, synchonization methods, non-linear modulation, and introduction to multipath fading channels, spread spectrum and OFDM. (Prerequisites: EEEE-484 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
EEEE-599 
Independent Study
A supervised investigation within an electrical engineering area of student interest. Professional
elective. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

General Engineering
EGEN-099 
Engineering Co-op Preparation
This course will prepare students, who are entering their second year of study, for both the job
search and employment in the field of engineering. Students will learn strategies for conducting
a successful job search, including the preparation of resumes and cover letters; behavioral interviewing techniques and effective use of social media in the application process. Professional and
ethical responsibilities during the job search and for co-op and subsequent professional experiences will be discussed. Class 1, Credit 0 (This course is restricted to students in Kate Gleason
College of Engineering with at least 2nd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

45

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

EGEN-100 
Engineering Exploration Seminar
A one-credit hour seminar course for engineering exploration students that provides information to introduce the seven engineering programs offered at RIT. Program curricula, sample
lab/project work, and various career opportunities pertaining to each major are presented.
(ENGRX-UND, UNIVST-UND) Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)
EGEN-231 
Manufacturing and Supply Chain
The second course in a series of three courses for engineering honors students focused on
how innovative products are developed, designed and manufactured to effectively meet the
expanding needs of a global economy. This course highlights key issues that decision-makers
in industry need to understand as they shape their companies to be more competitive in a
global context. Specific topics in the course include an in-depth discussion of the manufacturing supply chain and how active management of the supply chain can enhance profitability
and customer satisfaction. Additionally, the course addresses issues such as the the impact of
government policies and monetary issues on globalization and outsourcing. Lecture, Credits
1 (Fall)
EGEN-232 Leadership/Ethics/Sustainability
The third course in a series of courses for engineering honors students focused on how innovative products are developed, designed and manufactured to effectively meet the expanding
needs of a global economy. This course highlights key issues that decision-makers in industry
need to understand as they shape their companies to be more competitive in a global context.
A series of presentations by guest speakers address the topics of leadership, ethics, and sustainability. Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)

Industrial and Systems Engineering
ISEE-120 
Fundamentals of Industrial Engineering
An introductory course in industrial engineering for first and second year students. Describes
engineering in an overall sense and industrial engineering in particular. Includes an overview
of contemporary engineering topics, and charting and analysis tools used in industrial engineering within the context of the product and process development cycle and lean production.
Also reviews basic computer tools (e.g., Excel, Access) that can be used to solve IE problems.
Projects and group exercises will be used to cover hands-on applications and problem solving
related to topics covered in lectures. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISEE-140 
Materials Processing
A study of the application of machine tools and fabrication processes to engineering materials
in the manufacture of products. Processes covered include cutting, molding, casting, forming,
powder metallurgy, solid modeling, engineering drawing, and welding. Students make a project in the lab portion of the course. (ISEE-BS, ENGRX-UND) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISEE-200 
Computing for Engineers
A first course in computational problem solving for engineers. Students will learn the theory
necessary to develop algorithms to solve computational problems in the engineering disciplines.
Topics include: program design and implementation, integrated development environment,
mathematical operations, file input/output, data manipulations, functions, and arrays. Course
also covers an introduction to implementing object-oriented programming and graphical user
interface. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISEE-301 
Operations Research
An introduction to optimization through mathematical programming and stochastic modeling
techniques. Course topics include linear programming, transportation and assignment algorithms, Markov Chain queuing and their application on problems in manufacturing, health
care, financial systems, supply chain, and other engineering disciplines. Special attention is
placed on sensitivity analysis and the need of optimization in decision-making. The course
is delivered through lectures and a weekly laboratory where students learn to use state-ofthe-art software packages for modeling large discrete optimization problems. (Prerequisites:
MATH-233 or (MATH-231 and MATH-241) or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 4
(Fall, Spring)
ISEE-323 
Systems and Facilities Planning
A basic course in quantitative models on layout, material handling, and warehousing. Topics
include product/process analysis, flow of materials, material handling systems, warehousing
and layout design. A computer-aided layout design package is used. (Corequisites: ISEE-301
or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISEE-325 
Engineering Statistics and Design of Experiments
This course covers statistics for use in engineering as well as the primary concepts of experimental design. The first portion of the course will cover: Point estimation; hypothesis testing
and confidence intervals; one- and two-sample inference. The remainder of the class will be
spent on concepts of design and analysis of experiments. Lectures and assignments will incorporate real-world science and engineering examples, including studies found in the literature.
(Prerequisite: CQAS-251 or STAT-251 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

46	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ISEE-330 
Ergonomics and Human Factors
This course covers the physical and cognitive aspects of human performance to enable students
to design work places, procedures, products and processes that are consistent with human capabilities and limitations. Principles of physical work and human anthropometry are studied to
enable the student to systematically design work places, processes, and systems that are consistent with human capabilities and limitations. In addition, the human information processing
capabilities are studied, which includes the human sensory, memory, attention and cognitive
processes; display and control design principles; as well as human computer interface design.
(Prerequisites: CQAS-252 or MATH-252 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
ISEE-345 
Engineering Economy
Time value of money, methods of comparing alternatives, depreciation and depletion, income
tax consideration and capital budgeting. Cannot be used as a professional elective for ISE
majors. Course provides a foundation for engineers to effectively analyze engineering projects
with respect to financial considerations. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISEE-350 
Engineering Management
Development of the fundamental engineering management principles of industrial enterprise,
including an introduction to project management. Emphasis is on project management and
the development of the project management plan. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ISEE-420 
Production Planning/Scheduling
A first course in mathematical modeling of production-inventory systems. Topics include: forecasting, aggregate planning, inventory control models, and scheduling. (Prerequisites: ISEE-301
and (CQAS-251 or STAT-251 or MATH-251) or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISEE-421 
Design and Analysis of Production Systems
This course will provide an introduction to concepts and techniques in the design and analysis of production systems. A blend of traditional and modern approaches is brought into the
classroom. At the end of the semester, the student will be able to assess and analyze the performance of a given manufacturing system as well as to provide a framework for system redesign
and improvement. Modern aspects such as lean manufacturing are included in the context
of the course. (Corequisites: ISEE-420 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISEE-489 
Special Topics
Topics and subject areas that are not among the courses listed here are frequently offered
under the special topics title. Under the same title also may be found experimental courses that
may be offered for the first time. Such courses are offered in a formal format; that is, regularly
scheduled class sessions with an instructor. The level of complexity is commensurate with a
senior-level undergraduate technical course. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISEE-497 
Multidisciplinary Senior Design I
This is a two course sequence oriented to the solution of real world engineering design problems. This is a capstone learning experience that integrates engineering theory, principles,
and processes within a collaborative environment. Multidisciplinary student teams follow an
engineering design process, which includes assessing customer needs, developing engineering
specifications, generating and evaluating concepts, choosing an approach, completing systems
and subsystems designs, and implementing the design to the extent feasible, for example by
building and testing a prototype or implementing a chosen set of improvements to a process.
(This course is restricted to 5th year students in the ISEE-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
ISEE-498 
Multidisciplinary Senior Design II
This is a two course sequence oriented to the solution of real world engineering design problems. This is a capstone learning experience that integrates engineering theory, principles,
and processes within a collaborative environment. Multidisciplinary student teams follow an
engineering design process, which includes assessing customer needs, developing engineering
specifications, generating and evaluating concepts, choosing an approach, completing systems
and subsystems designs, and implementing the design to the extent feasible, for example by
building and testing a prototype or implementing a chosen set of improvements to a process.
(Prerequisites: ISEE-497 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISEE-499 Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in industrial engineering. (This course is restricted to
students in the ISEE-BS program.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ISEE-510 
Systems Simulation
Modeling and computer simulation of stochastic and dynamic manufacturing and service
systems are emphasized. A high level simulation language (e.g., ARENA) will be used to model and examine system performance. (Prerequisites: ISEE-200 and ISEE-301 or equivalent
course.Corequisites: CQAS-252 or MATH-252 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

ISEE-560 
Applied Statistical Quality Control
An applied approach to statistical quality control utilizing theoretical tools acquired in other
math and statistics courses. Heavy emphasis on understanding and applying statistical analysis
methods in real-world quality control situations in engineering. Topics include process capability analysis, acceptance sampling, hypothesis testing and control charts. Contemporary topics
such as six-sigma are included within the context of the course. (Co-requisites: CQAS-252 or
STAT-252 or MATH-252 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISEE-561 
Linear Regression Analysis
In any system where parameters of interest change, it may be of interest to examine the effects
that some variables exert (or appear to exert) on others. "Regression analysis" actually describes
a variety of data analysis techniques that can be used to describe the interrelationships among
such variables. In this course we will examine in detail the use of one popular analytic technique: least squares linear regression. Cases illustrating the use of regression techniques in
engineering applications will be developed and analyzed throughout the course. (Prerequisites:
(MATH-233 or (MATH-231 and MATH-241)) and (CQAS-252 or STAT-252 or MATH-252)
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ISEE-582 
Lean Six Sigma Fundamentals
This course presents the philosophy and methods that enable participants to develop quality strategies and drive process improvements. The fundamental elements of Lean Six Sigma
are covered along with many problem solving and statistical tools that are valuable in driving
process improvements in a broad range of business environments and industries. Successful
completion of this course is accompanied by “yellow belt” certification (for A’s and B’s only),
and provides a solid foundation for those who also wish to pursue a “green belt.” (Green belt
certification requires completion of an approved project and exam, both of which are beyond
the scope of this course). (Prerequisite: STAT-146 or STAT-252 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ISEE-599 
Independent Study
A supervised investigation within an industrial engineering area of student interest. Professional
elective. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 0 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Mechanical Engineering
MECE-103 Statics
This basic course treats the equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies under the action of forces.
It integrates the mathematical subjects of calculus, vector algebra and simultaneous algebraic equations with the physical concepts of equilibrium in two and three dimensions. Topics
include concepts of force and moment, friction, centroids and moments of inertia, and equilibrium of trusses, frames and machines. (Prerequisites: MECE-102 or (0304-280 and 0304-342)
or equivalent courses.Co-requisites: MATH-182 or or MATH-182A or MATH-173 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-104 
Engineering Design Tools
This course is an introduction to graphical communication as a tool in documenting the results
of an engineering design. Emphasis is placed on the use of Computer-Aided Drafting and 3-D
Solid Modeling systems to prepare working drawings packages of basic components and assemblies. Students combine the practice of sketching along with computer-based solid modeling to
produce a parametric design. At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to prepare
working drawings, with appropriate views, dimensions, title blocks, and bill of materials. This
course will also introduce students the skills they will need to address open-ended engineering design problems which require the fabrication of a prototype from engineering drawings.
Students will learn about problem definition, concept development, feasibility assessment,
managing design parameter tradeoffs using engineering analysis, developing a preliminary
design drawing package and constructing a working prototype. (MECE-BS,MECE-MN,ENGRXUND) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-109 
Computer Tools
This is a studio course, which covers the proper use of computers, and programs used to solve
engineering and science problems. This course is intended for transfer (internal and external)
students who have completed Physics I but have not taken MECE-102 Engineering Mechanics
Lab, of subsequent computer course. (Co-requisite: PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or 1017-311
or 1017-369 or PHYS-206 and PHYS-207 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)
MECE-110 
Thermodynamics I
A basic course introducing the classical theory of thermodynamics. Applications of the first
law of thermodynamics are used to introduce the student to thermodynamic processes for
closed and open systems. The Clausius and Kelvin-Planck statements of the second law are
then correlated with the concept of entropy and enthalpy to investigate both real and reversible
processes and the thermodynamic properties of pure substances. (Prerequisites: MECE-102 or
(0304-280 and 0304-342) or equivalent courses.Co-requisites: MATH-182 or or MATH-182A
or MATH-173 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

MECE-200 
Fundamentals of Mechanics
Statics: equilibrium, the principle of transmissibility of forces, couples, centroids, trusses,
frames, machines and friction. Introduction to strength of materials: axial stresses and strains,
statically indeterminate problems, torsion and bending. Dynamics: dynamics of particles and
rigid bodies with an introduction to kinematics and kinetics of particles and rigid bodies,
work, energy, impulse momentum and mechanical vibrations. Emphasis is on problem solving. For students majoring in industrial and systems engineering. (Prerequisites: PHYS-211 or
PHYS-211A or 1017-312 or 1017-312T or 1017-389 or PHYS-206 and PHYS-207 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
MECE-203 
Strength of Materials I
A basic course in the fundamental principles of the mechanics of deformable media, including
stress, strain, deflections and the relationships among them. The basic loadings of tension, compression, shear, torsion and bending are also included. (Prerequisites: MECE-103 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-204 
Strength of Materials I Laboratory
A required laboratory course taken concurrently with MECE-203. Students investigate a
metallic material’s response to axial, torsional, and bending loads. Students are introduced
to reduction and analysis of data, basic experimental techniques, and effective report writing.
(Co-requisites: MECE-203 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-210 
Fluid Mechanics I
Includes the physical characteristics of a fluid: density, stress, pressure, viscosity, temperature,
vapor pressure, compressibility. Descriptions of flows: Lagrangian and Eulerian; stream-lines,
path-lines, streak-lines. Classification of flows. fluid statics: hydrostatic pressure at a point,
pressure field in a static fluid, manometry, forces on submerged surfaces, buoyancy, standard
and adiabatic atmospheres. Flow fields and fundamental laws; systems and control volumes,
Reynolds Transport theorem, integral control volume analysis of basic equations for stationary and moving control volumes. Inviscid Bernoulli and the Engineering Bernoulli equation,
some applications. Incompressible flow in pipes; laminar and turbulent flows, separation phenomenon, dimensional analysis. (Prerequisites: MECE-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-211 
Engineering Measurements Lab
This course investigates various physical phenomena in real applications, which are analyzed
according to theories learned in associated lecture courses. The purpose is to reinforce those
theories by example. On a deeper level, the investigative tasks also serve to develop fundamentals of experimental design, measurement, data analysis, estimation of uncertainties, and
technical writing. (Co-requisites: MECE-210 or equivalent course.) Lab 1, Lecture 1, Credits
2 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-251 
Principles of Thermodynamics, Fluids, and Heat Transfer
This course introduces the principles of energy transfer through the use of first principles
and empirical correlations. Topics include concepts of pressure, temperature, internal energy, enthalpy, entropy, thermodynamic cycles, Newtonian fluids, manometry, fluid flow,
conduction, convection, and radiation. Techniques include the conservation of energy and
momentum. This course introduces the principles of energy and its transport in cycles and systems. Rudimentary systems-level examples are presented. (Enrollment in this course requires
permission from the department offering the course.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-253 
Fundamentals of Mechanical Design for Mechatronics
This course builds upon the core principles of mechanical engineering to introduce fundamental concepts of mechanical design as applied to mechatronics systems. Topics include thermal
and mechanical failure modes or mechatronic systems, design considerations to mitigate failures modes; materials science considerations such as materials compatibility, corrosion and
material selection; and solid modeling of mechatronic systems for parts, assemblies, parametric
design, and revision control. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-301 
Engineering Applications Laboratory
As a modification of the more “traditional” lab approach, students work in teams to complete
an open-ended project involving theoretical and empirical analyses of an assigned system,
applying engineering concepts and skills learned throughout prior courses. After successfully
completing this course, students will have achieved a higher level of understanding of, and
proficiency in, the tasks of qualitative treatment of real systems, development and implementation of analytical models, design and implementation of experimental investigations, and
validation of results. (Prerequisites: (MECE-102 or (0304-280 and 0304-342)), (MECE-104 or
(0304-214 and 0304-343)), MECE-204 and MECE-211 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

47

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

MECE-304 
Fundamentals of Material Science
This course provides the student with an overview of structure, properties, and processing
of metals, polymers, and ceramics. Materials selection is also discussed. There is a particular emphasis on steels, but significant attention is given to non-ferrous metals, ceramics, and
polymers This course does not include a laboratory component. (Prerequisite: ISEE-140 or
0303-343 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Spring)
MECE-305 
Materials Science with Applications
This course provides the student with an overview of structure, properties, and processing
of metals, polymers, and ceramics. Materials selection is also discussed. There is a particular
emphasis on steels, but significant attention is given to non-ferrous metals, ceramics, and polymers This course does not include a laboratory component. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-306 
Materials Science and Applications Laboratory
A required laboratory course in support of MECE-305. (Co-requisites: MECE-304 or MECE305 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-310 
Heat Transfer I
A first course in the fundamentals of heat transfer by conduction, convection and radiation,
together with applications to typical engineering systems. Topics include one- and twodimensional steady state and transient heat conduction, radiation exchange between black
and gray surfaces, correlation equations for laminar/turbulent internal and external convection, and an introduction to heat exchangers analysis and design by LMTD and NTU methods.
(Prerequisites: MECE-210 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-320 
System Dynamics
This required course introduces the student to lumped parameter system modeling, analysis
and design. The determination and solution of differential equations that model system behavior is a vital aspect of the course. System response phenomena are characterized in both time
and frequency domains and evaluated based on performance criteria. Laboratory exercises
enhance student proficiency with model simulation, basic instrumentation, data acquisition,
data analysis, and model validation. (KGCOE Multiple Course Prereq23) Lecture/Lab, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-348 
Contemporary Issues
This course introduces students to contemporary technologies in a specific field of mechanical
engineering. In the process of exploring these technologies, the course teaches and applies skills
related to communication, economic analysis, ethical analysis, and explores the positive and
negative effects of technologies on our society and environment. Specific attention is focused
on current events both domestically and internationally. (Prerequisite or Co-requisites: MECE499 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-350 
Strengths II
This course provides a continuation of concepts pertaining to the mechanics of deformable media and their relation to the failure of materials. Failure topics pertaining to yielding,
buckling, fracture, and fatigue for structures under static and dynamic loading conditions
are discussed. A function-constraints-objective approach to the mechanical design process is
introduced. (Prerequisites: MECE-203 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-352 
Thermodynamics II
Advanced design and analysis of gas and vapor power cycles, including co-generation and combined cycles, as well as vapor compression and air-conditioning cycles using concepts of exergy
based on the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics and the field of thermo-economics. Emphasis is
also placed on determining entropy generation and irreversibility within fossil fuel combustion
processes using chemical energy. (Prerequisites: MECE-110 and CHMG-141 or CHMG-131 or
equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-354 
Heat Transfer II
Consists of the numerical solution of heat transfer problems. One-and two-dimensional steadystate as well as transient conduction cases are analyzed. A detailed study of single-phase forced
and natural convective heat transfer is presented. Heat transfer during pool boiling, flow boiling and condensation is studied. Design aspects of heat transfer equipment are introduced.
The students undertake a major design project. (Prerequisites: MECE-310 and MECE-317 or
equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3
MECE-355 
Fluid Mechanics II
A second course in fluid mechanics, integrating concepts of heat and mass transfer. Use of
the differential form of the fundamental equations of the conservation of mass, momentum
and energy is derived and used throughout. Topics include potential flow, viscous internal
plane and pipe flows, external boundary layers, and the convective transport of heat and mass.
(Prerequisites: MECE-210 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

48	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MECE-360 
Advanced Computational Techniques
This extension of Numerical Methods, MECE-317, covers finite element and finite difference
techniques and their applications in mechanical engineering (structural analysis, heat transfer,
fluid mechanics). (Prerequisites: MECE-317 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-401 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
A basic course in the principles and applications of refrigeration and air conditioning involving mechanical vapor compression and absorption refrigeration cycles, associated hardware,
psychometrics, and thermodynamic design of air conditioning systems and calculation of
heating and cooling loads for structures. Students are expected to do a team design project.
(Prerequisites: MECE-310 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-402 Turbomachinery
Examines the basic principles applicable to all turbomachinery as well as the consideration of
the operating and design characteristics of several basic classes of turbomachinery, including,
centrifugal pumps, compressors, and turbines, as well as axial compressors and turbines, and
hydraulic turbines. Includes a major team design project. (Prerequisites: MECE-210 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-403 Propulsion
The fundamentals of propulsion including the basic operating principles and design methods
for flight vehicle propulsion systems. Topics include air-breathing engines (turbojets, ramjets,
turboprops and turbofans) as well as liquid and solid propellant chemical rockets. Students
complete a team study project including a written report and a presentation of the results.
(Prerequisites: MECE-310 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-404 Robotics
An applied course in the fundamentals and applications of autonomous robots. Emphasis is
placed on the use of microcontrollers to construct mobile robots. Topics include microcontroller programming, robot fundamentals, DC servo and stepper motors, encoders, sensors,
programming, gripper design, and safety. A major emphasis is placed in a design project involving the design, build, and test of a mobile robot for an application. (Prerequisites: MECE-320
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-405 
Wind Turbine Engineering
This course explores the basic aerodynamic elements of small-scale, horizontal axis wind turbines. A major component of the course is a project involving the design, construction, and
testing of various blade profiles for a simple test turbine facility, utilizing a novel foam-paper
construction process. Students will make use of various software packages for the project,
including ProEngineer (or similar), MATLAB, and LabVIEW. Some attention may be given to
larger-scale turbines, siting and environmental issues, power generation concerns, and other
related topics as time and interest allow. (Prerequisites: MECE-210 and MECE-317 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-406 
Advanced Solid Modeling and Design
This course covers advanced solid modeling concepts utilizing industry standard parametric
3D modeling software. Part modeling concepts include parametric design, surface modeling
and 3D annotation. Assembly modeling concepts include top down assembly, mechanisms and
assemblies. A team design project will reverse engineer a given assembly and suggest improvements. (Prerequisites: MECE-104 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
MECE-407 
Biomedical Device Eng
This course is an introduction to the design of medical devices and issues that are unique to
these devices. Course content includes some historical background, an overview of existing
devices and trends, material selection, interfaces of medical devices with biological tissues,
product testing, reliability, and regulations specific to the design and validation of medical
devices. A substantial part of the course is a project, in which students will be required to work
in teams to complete a preliminary design of a novel device, including appropriate analysis and
documentation. Analysis methods learned from prior coursework in the students discipline
will be applied to this component of the course. (Prerequisites: (MECE-203 and MECE-310) or
(BIME-410 and BIME-440) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-409 Aerodynamics
This course presents the essentials of aerodynamic theory. This course is used in place of
Transport Phenomena for students enrolled in the Aero Option. Topics include differential
equations of fluid mechanics, airfoil theory, wings of finite span, inviscid potential flows, laminar and turbulent boundary layer, Airfoil design is explored through software. A design project
is required. (Prerequisites: MECE-210 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

MECE-410 
Flight Dynamics
This course deals with the three-dimensional dynamics of aircraft, including general aircraft
performance, stability and control, and handling qualities. Topics include mathematical development of equations-of-motion describing full range of aircraft motion; aerodynamic forming
term coefficient development, quaternion alternative; linearization of nonlinear aircraft models,
determination of range, endurance and rate of climb; simulation of aircraft trajectory; static and
dynamic stability; aircraft control; and aircraft handling qualities introduction. (Co-requisites:
MECE-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-411 
Orbital Mechanics
This course introduces orbital mechanics and space flight dynamics theory with application
for Earth, lunar, and planetary orbiting spacecraft. Content includes historical background
and equations of motion, two-body orbital mechanics, orbit determination, orbit prediction,
orbital maneuvers, lunar and interplanetary trajectories, orbital rendezvous and space navigation (time permitting). The two body orbital mechanics problem, first approximation to all
exploration orbits or trajectories, is covered with an introduction to the three body problem.
Students develop computer based simulations of orbital mechanics problems including a final
mission project simulation from Earth to Mars and home again requiring a number of orbit
phases and transfers between these phases. (Prerequisites: MECE-320 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-412 Aerostructures
The principles of deformable bodies as applied to the analysis and design of aircraft and space
vehicle structures. Topics include the study of bending and torsion of thin-walled, multi-cell
beams and columns; wing and fuselage stress analysis; and structural stability. Strain energy
concepts and matrix methods are utilized throughout the course. (Prerequisites: MECE-203
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-421 
Internal Combustion Engines
An introduction to the operation and design of internal combustion engines. Topics include
engine types and cycles, fuels, intake and exhaust processes, emissions and emission control systems, heat transfer and lubrication. (Prerequisites: MECE-110 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-450 
Introduction to Matlab Procedural Programming
This course introduces the principles of MATLAB through the use of examples problems and a
hands-on learning approach. MATLAB topics include: MATLAB online help, MATLAB basic
function usage, matrix manipulation, polynomials, programming loops (for/while), operators, logical operations, conditional flow control (if-then statements), programming MATLAB
(m-files), data import/export, plotting graphic routines, data analysis, custom functions, differential equation solutions, optimization, Fourier transforms, systems modeling, introduction
to external interfaces. Several systems-level examples are presented. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall,
Spring)
MECE-451 
Introduction To Simulink and Embedded Systems
This course introduces the principles of Simulink through the use of examples problems and
a hands-on learning approach. Simulink topics include: creating a model file, basic block
manipulation, interface with Matlab, modeling and solutions of systems, creating subsystems, S-functions, custom blocks. Several systems-level examples are presented. Introduction
to embedded system programming with microprocessors focusing on measuring input, manipulating data, and controlling output. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Lecture 3, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-489 
Undergraduate Special Topics
In response to student and/or faculty interest, special courses that are of current interest and/
or logical continuation of regular courses will be presented. (This course requires permission
of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MECE-498 
Multidisciplinary Sr. Design II
The second of the two-course capstone design sequence. The same student teams from Senior
Design I return to build and test a working prototype of their previously developed final design.
Continued emphasis is placed on teamwork and on developing good oral, written and interpersonal communication skills. (Prerequisites: MECE-497 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-499 
Cooperative Education
Nominally three months of full-time, paid employment in the mechanical engineering field.
(Prerequisites: (MECE-110 and MECE-203 and MECE-099) or MECE-499.) Co-op, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

MECE-520 
Introduction To Optimal Design
This course is an introduction to basic optimization techniques for engineering design synthesis. Topics covered include: basic concepts, the general problem statement, necessary conditions
of optimization, numerical techniques for unconstrained optimization, constrained optimization through unconstrained optimization, and direct methods. Numerical solutions are
obtained using MATLAB software. A design project is required. (Prerequisites: MECE-317 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-523 
Powertrain Systems and Design
This course will introduce the analysis and design of power transmission systems. Topics covered include spur, helical, bevel, and worm gears, gear trains, planetary gear systems, power
transmission shafts, belt and chain drives, and systems such as electric and hydraulic power transmission. The transmission of power at the required speed and torque is the primary
function of most power transmission systems, and is the focus of this course. Students will use
this foundation to complete a case study project whereby they review and analyse how power
is transmitted from the primary source to the remainder of the driveline by means such as
manual transmissions, automatic transmissions, continuously variable transmissions, and
direct drive systems. (Prerequisites: MECE-350 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-524 
Vehicle Dynamics
Deals with the fundamentals of ground vehicle motion, stability and control. The contribution
of tire longitudinal and lateral forces, stiffness, and aligning torque to vehicle stability is discussed. Bicycle and four-wheel vehicle models are analyzed for neutral, under and oversteer
characteristics. The effects of suspension geometry, chassis stiffness and roll stiffness on stability and handling are analyzed. Matching transmission design to engine characteristics to
achieve required vehicle performance is discussed. (Co-requisites: MECE-320 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MECE-525 
Lab Applications in Mechatronics
This course provides a culminating experience for the mechatronics engineering certificate,
relying upon the completed course work and culminating in development of laboratory experiences related to mechatronics. Students enrolled in the course will design and prepare a novel
lab experiment and complete lab experiments created by peers. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) Lab 1, Lecture 2, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
MECE-529 
Renewable Energy Systems
This course provides an overview of renewable energy system design. Energy resource assessment, system components, and feasibility analysis will be covered. Possible topics to be covered
include photovoltaics, wind turbines, solar thermal, hydropower, biomass, and geothermal.
Students will be responsible for a final design project. (Prerequisites: MECE-310 and MECE352 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-538 
Design of Machine Systems
This is an applied course in the selection of components and integration of those components
into electro-pneumatic-mechanical devices and systems. Topics involve all aspects of machine
design, including drive components and systems, motion generation and control, and electrical control hardware and strategy. (Prerequisites: MECE-205 and MECE-350 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture, Credits 3
MECE-543 
Classical Controls
This course introduces students to the study of linear control system behavior for design and
use in augmenting system performance. This is accomplished through classical control methods using Laplace transforms, block diagrams, root locus, and frequency domain analysis.
Topics include: Laplace transform review, system modeling for control, fundamentals of time
response behavior, stability analysis, steady-state error and design, feedback control properties, PID control, root locus analysis and design, and frequency response design. A laboratory
will provide students with hands-on analysis and design-build-test experience. (Prerequisites:
MECE-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-544 
Introduction To Composite Materials
This course is an introductory course to the fundamentals and applications of composite materials. Topics covered include constituents of composite materials, fabrication techniques,
micromechanical analysis, macromechanical analysis, and the use of composites in design.
Some laboratory work is to be performed, and a design project is required. (Prerequisites:
MECE-203, MECE-305 and MECE-360 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

49

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

MECE-556 
Applied Biotransport
Review of the fundamentals of momentum, energy and mass transport within the context of
biological systems ranging from the organelles in cells to whole plants and animals and their
environments. Use of theoretical equations and empirical relations to model and predict the
characteristics of diffusive, convective and radiative transport in complex biological systems
and their environments. Emphasis is placed on the physical understanding of these systems
through the construction of simplified mathematical models amenable to analytical, numerical or statistical formulations and solutions. (Prerequisites: MECE-310 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3

MCEE-360 
Semiconductor Devices for Microelectronic Engineers
An extensive study of semiconductor physics, principles and device operation tied to realistic
device structures and fabrication techniques. Topics include semiconductor fundamentals,
pn junction diodes, metal-semiconductor junctions, metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect
transistors (MOSFETs), and bipolar junction transistors (BJT). Throughout the course, finite
element simulation of realistic device structures (derived from a technology computer aided
design tool) using a Poisson solving software package will be used to reinforce key concepts.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-212 or PHYS-208 and 209 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4
(Fall, Spring)

MECE-557 
Applied Biomaterials
This course provides an overview of materials used in biomedical applications. Topics covered
include structure and properties of hard and soft biomaterials, material selection for medical
applications, material performance and degradation in hostile environments, and typical and
abnormal physiological responses to biomaterials/environments. Some experiments will be
performed in class and a major project is required. (MECE-BS, BIME-BS) Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)

MCEE-495 
Senior Design I
A capstone design experience for microelectronic engineering senior students. Students propose a project related to microelectronic process, device, component or system design, to meet
desired specifications within realistic constraints such as economic, environmental, social,
political, ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and sustainability. The students plan
a timetable and write a formal proposal. The proposal is evaluated on the basis of intellectual
merit, sound technical/research plan, and feasibility. The proposed work is carried through
in the sequel course, Senior Design Project II (MCEE-496). Each student is required to make
a presentation of the proposal. (Prerequisites: EEEE-482 and 5th year standing in MCEE-BS
with completion of two co-ops (MCEE-499).) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

MECE-558 
Introduction to Engineering Vibrations
Is concerned with analytically finding the dynamic characteristics (natural frequencies and
mode shapes) of vibratory mechanical systems (single-degree and multi-degrees of freedom
systems), and the response of the systems to external excitations (transient, harmonic, and
periodic). Application to vibration damping techniques (Dynamic Vibration Absorbers) is also
covered. In addition, laboratory exercises are performed, and an independent design project is
assigned. (Prerequisites: MECE-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MECE-589 
UG Upper Level Special Topics
In response to student and/or faculty interest, special courses that are of current interest and/
or logical continuation of regular courses will be presented. (Permission of the supervising
faculty member and the department head required) See instructor for more details. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MECE-599 
Undergraduate Independent Study
An independent student project course encompassing one of (a) an analytical investigation,
(b) an experimental investigation or (c) a major design project. All independent student projects require a formal written report. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Microelectronic Engineering
MCEE-101 
Introduction to Nanoelectronics
An overview of semiconductor technology history and future trends is presented. The course
introduces the fabrication and operation of silicon-based integrated circuit devices including
resistors, diodes, transistors and their current-voltage (I-V) characteristics. The course also
introduces the fundamentals of micro/nanolithography, with topics such as IC masking, sensitometry, radiometry, resolution, photoresist materials and processing. Laboratory teaches
the basics of IC fabrication, photolithography and I-V measurements. A five-week project
provides experience in digital circuit design, schematic capture, simulation, bread-boarding,
layout design, IC processing and testing. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MCEE-201 
IC Technology
An introduction to the basics of integrated circuit fabrication. The electronic properties of
semiconductor materials and basic device structures are discussed, along with fabrication topics including photolithography diffusion and oxidation, ion implantation, and metallization.
The laboratory uses a four-level metal gate PMOS process to fabricate an IC chip and provide
experience in device design - and layout (CAD), process design, in-process characterization and
device testing. Students will understand the basic interaction between process design, device
design and device layout. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCEE-205 
Statistics and Design of Experiments
Statistics and Design of Experiments will study descriptive statistics, measurement techniques,
SPC, Process Capability Analysis, experimental design, analysis of variance, regression and
response surface methodology, and design robustness. The application of the normal distribution and the central limit theorem will be applied to confidence intervals and statistical
inference as well as control charts used in SPC. Students will utilize statistical software to
implement experimental design concepts, analyze case studies and design efficient experiments. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

50	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MCEE-496 
Senior Design II
A capstone design experience for microelectronic engineering senior students. In this course,
students conduct a hands-on implementation of the projects proposed in the previous course,
Senior Design Project I. Technical presentations of the results, including a talk and a poster,
are required at the annual conference on microelectronic engineering organized by the program. A written paper in IEEE format is required and is included in the conference journal.
(Prerequisites: MCEE-495 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCEE-499 
Microelectronic Engineering Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in microelectronic engineering. (This class is restricted to students in MCEE-BS or BS/MS students in MCEEMSCI-U.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
MCEE-502 
Semiconductor Process Integration
This is an advanced level course in Integrated Circuit Devices and process technology. A detailed
study of processing modules in modern semiconductor fabrication sequences will be done
through simulation. Device engineering challenges such as shallow-junction formation, fin
FETs, ultra-thin gate dielectrics, and replacement metal gates are covered. Particular emphasis
will be placed on non-equilibrium effects. Silvaco Athena and Atlas will be used extensively for
process simulation. (Prerequisites: MCEE-201 or equivalent course.Co-requisite: MCEE-360
or EEEE-260 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCEE-503 
Thin Films
This course focuses on the deposition and etching of thin films of conductive and insulating
materials for IC fabrication. A thorough overview of vacuum technology is presented to familiarize the student with the challenges of creating and operating in a controlled environment.
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition (PVD & CVD) are discussed as methods of film deposition. Plasma etching and Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP) are studied as methods
for selective removal of materials. Applications of these fundamental thin film processes to IC
manufacturing are presented. (Prerequisites: MCEE-201 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCEE-505 
Lithography Materials and Processes
Microlithography Materials and Processes covers the chemical aspects of microlithography
and resist processes. Fundamentals of polymer technology will be addressed and the chemistry of various resist platforms including novolac, styrene, and acrylate systems will be covered.
Double patterning materials will also be studied. Topics include the principles of photoresist
materials, including polymer synthesis, photochemistry, processing technologies and methods of process optimization. Also advanced lithographic techniques and materials, including
multi-layer techniques for BARC, double patterning, TARC, and next generation materials and
processes are applied to optical lithography. (Prerequisites: CHMG-131 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MCEE-515 
Nanolithography Systems
An advanced course covering the physical aspects of micro- and nano-lithography. Image
formation in projection and proximity systems are studied. Makes use of optical concepts as
applied to lithographic systems. Fresnel diffraction, Fraunhofer diffraction, and Fourier optics
are utilized to understand diffraction-limited imaging processes and optimization. Topics
include illumination, lens parameters, image assessment, resolution, phase-shift masking,
and resist interactions as well as non-optical systems such as EUV, maskless, e-beam, and
nanoimprint. Lithographic systems are designed and optimized through use of modeling and
simulation packages. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Kate Gleason College of Engineering

MCEE-520 
Photovoltaic Science and Engineering
This course focuses on the principle and engineering fundamentals of photovoltaic (PV) energy
conversion. The course covers modern silicon PV devices, including the basic physics, ideal
and non-ideal models, device parameters and design, and device fabrication. The course discusses crystalline, multi-crystalline, amorphous thin films solar cells and their manufacturing.
Students will become familiar with basic semiconductor processes and how they are employed
in solar cells manufacturing. The course further introduces third generation advanced photovoltaic concepts including compound semiconductors, spectral conversion, and organic
and polymeric devices. PV applications, environmental, sustainability and economic issues
will also be discussed. Evaluations include assignments and exams, a research/term paper on
a current PV topic. (This class is restricted to degree seeking students with at least 4th year
level.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MCEE-550 
CMOS Processing
A laboratory course in which students manufacture and test CMOS integrated circuits. Topics
include design of individual process operations and their integration into a complete manufacturing sequence. Students are introduced to work in process tracking, ion implantation,
oxidation, diffusion, plasma etch, LPCVD, and photolithography. Student learn VLSI design
fundamentals of circuit simulation and layout. Analog and Digital CMOS devices are made
and tested. This course is organized around multidisciplinary teams that address the management, engineering and operation of the student run CMOS factory. (Prerequisites: (EEEE-260
or MCEE-360) and MCEE-502 and MCEE-505 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Credits 4 (Fall)
MCEE-599 
Independent Study
A supervised investigation within a microelectronic engineering area of student interest.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 5 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

51

College of Health Sciences and Technology

College of Health Sciences
and Technology

MEDS-106 
Seminar in Exercise Science
This course will provide first-year exercise science students with a strong foundation for
successful transition to university life. The course will introduce them to key personnel and
resources essential for academic and personal achievement at RIT. Students will also develop
a peer-based learning community with group projects centered on exercise science. Lecture
1, Credits 1 (Fall)

Index
MEDG	 Biomedical Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
MEDS	 Biomedical Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
DMSO	 Diagnostic Medical Sonography.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
ECHO	Echocardiography .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
HLTH	 Health Systems Administration.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
ILLM	 Medical Illustration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
NUTR	 Nutrition Management .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
PHYA	 Physician Assistant .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

52
52
56
57
58
58
59
60

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Biomedical Sciences
MEDG-101 
Human Biology I
This course is one of a two-course set of courses that explores the biology of the human body.
This course focuses on: cells, their structure, and organization; the human reproductive cycle;
principle of genetic inheritance; transmission of disease and the body’s defense against disease.
Recommended to concurrently take: MEDG-103 Human Biology Laboratory I *Note: Taken
alone, this course fulfills the Scientific Principles Perspective. When taken with MEDG-103 the
two courses together fulfill the Natural Science Inquiry Perspective Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDG-103 
Human Biology Laboratory I
This laboratory complements the lecture material of Human Biology I. Experiments are
designed to illustrate the dynamic characteristics of a cell during processes of inheritance,
development and disease. Recommended to concurrently take: MEDG-101 Human Biology I
*Note: When taken with MEDG-101 the two courses together fulfill the Natural Science Inquiry
Perspective Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall)
MEDG-104 
Human Biology Laboratory II
This laboratory course complements the lecture material presented in Human Biology II. Lab
experiments are designed to illustrate the dynamic anatomy and physiology of the human body
organ systems. Recommended to concurrently take: MEDG-102 Human Biology II *Note: When
taken with MEDG-102 the two courses together fulfill the Natural Science Inquiry Perspective.
Lab 2, Credits 1 (Spring)
MEDG-105 
Health Awareness
This course explores the effects of wellness and disease prevention on the human lifecycle,
lifestyles and overall health. Basic structure and function of selected human body systems are
discussed and related to factors such as diet and nutrition, alcohol, drugs, smoking, stress and
the environment in discussion of health promotion and disease prevention. Lecture and class
discussion and student participation are used to explore health related issues. (This course
is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDG-106 
Microbiology of Health and Disease
An introductory course in microbiology including its history, significant contributions to medicine and history, as well as a survey of microbiological organisms as they relate to disease,
industry and biotechnology. (any course in Biology) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDG-107 
Human Diseases
A general survey of human diseases from a systematic approach with emphasis on disease
symptoms, etiology, diagnosis and prognosis. Also included are the topics of immunology,
oncology, endocrinology, and pathophysiology. Upon completion of this course students will
have a basic knowledge of many diseases that afflict mankind. Lab 1, Lecture 2, Credits 3
(Spring)
MEDS-105 
Issues in Health Sciences and Technology
This course will provide first-year students with an enhanced understanding of critical issues
in global health, science and technology. It will explore cultural awareness and perspectives
as well as the consequences of individual and group decisions on the health of communities.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

52	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MEDS-150 
Introduction to Exercise Science
In this initial course of the Exercise Science undergraduate curriculum, students will be introduced to a broad array of topics within the field. Through an introductory review of body
systems and physiological concepts students will gain an understanding and appreciation for
the processes of response and adaptation which enhance and improve both health and fitness of people who exercise regularly. Career options will be reviewed and explored giving
students an informed exposure to potential areas of future employment. (BIOL101 or equivalent) (Prerequisites: BIOL-101 or equivalent course.) Lab 1, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-201 
Language of Medicine
Language is a systematic means or method of communicating ideas, events, or feelings. It is
a combination of words or symbols used to encode and decode information. Medicine has a
language to communicate information regarding the human body, its functions, diseases, tests,
and procedures. This course explores the language of medicine, the rules of “language,” language mechanics that apply how to create words, define terms, and identify abbreviations. In
addition to learning the fundamentals, the student will gain experience in writing, using the
language of medicine, as well as interpreting that language into everyday English. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MEDS-240 
History of Medicine
This course explores various discoveries in the history of medicine and the individuals credited with the discoveries. The course begins in ancient Greece and ends with modern times.
Individuals such as Hippocrates, Vesalius, Harvey, Jenner, Leeuwenhoek and Roentgen will
be discussed. (Prerequisites: (BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or (MEDG-101 and MEDG-102) or
equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-245 
Medical Genetics
This course will serve as an introduction to the field of medical genetics. Throughout the
course we will survey several human variations and diseases of medical importance. Clinical
case reports will be incorporated to illustrate the underlying genetic principles. (Prerequisites:
(BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or (BIOL-121 and BIOL-122) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-250 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I
This course is an integrated approach to the structure and function of the nervous, endocrine, integumentary, muscular and skeletal systems. Laboratory exercises include histological
examination, actual and simulated anatomical dissections, and physiology experiments with
human subjects. (Prerequisites: (BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or (BIOL-121 and BIOL-122) or
(1001-201 and 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251 and 1001-252 and 1001-253) or (MEDG102 or 1026-213) or NUTR-BS equivalent courses. CHST Multiple Course Prereq 18) Lab 3,
Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
MEDS-251 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II
This course is an integrated approach to the structure and function of the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, immunological, respiratory, excretory, and reproductive systems with an emphasis
on the maintenance of homeostasis. Laboratory exercises include histological examinations,
anatomical dissections and physiological experiments using human subjects. (Prerequisites:
(BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or (BIOL-121 and BIOL-122) or (1001-201 and 1001-202 and 1001203) or (1001-251 and 1001-252 and 1001-253) or (MEDG-102 or 1026-213) or NUTR-BS
equivalent courses. CHST Multiple Course Prereq 18) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
MEDS-280 
Laboratory Teaching Assistant
This course provides students the opportunity to learn by teaching, as they assistant the laboratory instructor in facilitating student learning. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
MEDS-281 
Classroom Teaching Assistant
This course provides students the opportunity to learn by teaching, as they assistant the course
instructor in facilitating student learning. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
MEDS-290 
Biomedical Research
This course provides an opportunity for in-depth experiential learning through collaborative
work on an independent research project. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)

College of Health Sciences and Technology

MEDS-293 
Human Motor Behavior
Human movement is complex and learning to move is an essential component of a lifetime
of healthy activity. Exploring the nexus of learning and movement is the primary aim of this
course. Using application-based activities students will develop the skills to recognize movement patterns, perform assessments and correct inefficient movement. After successful
completion students will be able to provide appropriate instruction leading to better movement mechanics, reduced risk of injury and higher levels of athletic performance. (Prerequisites:
MEDS-250 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-294 
Group Exercise
Group exercise has progressed to include a wide variety of activities, equipment and environments. This course explores both the dynamics of group participation as well as techniques
of instruction across a number of modalities including; hi/low impact, step training, kickboxing, sport conditioning, stationary indoor cycling, water exercise, yoga, and Pilates. Students
will not only learn theory but will also design and teach classes to one another. Graduates of
the class will be prepared to achieve certification in many of the modalities included in the
course. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103) or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and 1026-231) or (1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and
1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or equivalent course(s).) Lab 2, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-295 
Sports Physiology and Life Fitness
This course goes inside the science of physical fitness providing the student with an in depth
physiological understanding of how the body adapts and improves through exercise activity. Students actively perform a series of self-assessments which they must analyze in order
to determine their current state of fitness. With this data students develop exercise programs
tailored to their needs and interests. Stress management and nutrition are examined allowing
students to incorporate these two important areas into their plans to be fit for life. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MEDS-296 
Fitness Prescription
This course is designed to provide instruction to prepare students for certification as a Personal
Trainer. It examines the role exercise plays in both the enhancement of health and fitness as
well as the improvement of athletic performance. Students will develop a basic understanding
of how the human body functions while physically active. Case studies are utilized to assist in
the development of practical skills. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103) or (MEDG102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and 1026-231) or (1026-212
and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or equivalent course(s).)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-297 
Exercise for Special Populations
This course is designed for those who are interested in the science of exercise and fitness for
individuals with diagnosed disease states, or high performance requirements. The theoretical
and diagnostic value of exercise testing will be reviewed. This information will then be used
to create exercise prescriptions and understand the therapeutic benefit that exercise will have
on specific conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, hypertension, heart disease,
and obesity. High performance individuals functioning in challenging environments such as,
astronauts, high altitude climbers and ultramarathoners will also be considered. (Prerequisites:
MEDS-295 or MEDS-296 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-298 
Strength Training for Performance
Stronger athletes make better athletes no matter what the sport and this course teaches
techniques of optimal training to enhance the muscular fitness of all manner of athletes.
Physiological principles of strength development and basic musculoskeletal anatomy are
reviewed and general program design is discussed. Utilizing case studies, students develop
sport specific programs which will be presented to the class. Students will also produce strength
training manuals outlining appropriate guidelines for improved performance. (Prerequisites:
(MEDG-101 and MEDG-103) or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or
(1026-211 and 1026-231) or (1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001201 or 1001-251 or equivalent course(s).) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-299 
Independent Study
This course will provide students the opportunity for independent study in a topic of strong
interest. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MEDS-300 
Premedical Studies Seminar
This course prepares students to navigate the admissions process and interviews for medical,
osteopathic, optometry, podiatric and dental school. The preparation will also address issues
related to the field of medicine, including alternatives, ethics, and financial concerns. Lecture
1, Credits 1 (Fall)

	

MEDS-310 
Introduction to Pharmacology
This course provides an overview of the pharmacy profession (educational requirements, professional responsibilities and oppor-tunities, role of the pharmacist in the health care team) and
a detailed look into basic pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetic, and pharmaceutical principles.
The pharmacodynamics principles covered include mechanisms of drug action, drug-receptor
interaction theory, dose-response relationships, structure-activity relationships, and principles of drug metabolism. Pharmaceutical topics include formulations, drug product design,
excipients, dosage forms, and elimination rate. Lastly, specific disease states will be covered
that will clearly, and effectively demonstrate many of the topics taught. The diseases will be
approached by presenting the etiology followed by the pharmacotherapy, including the details
of the multiple drug classes that are used for any one-disease state. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250
and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-311 
Diagnosing the Criminal Mind
This course will introduce students within the biomedical sciences, physician assistant, psychology and criminal justice fields to understand basic clinical diagnostic terms, symptoms
and behaviors that pertain to clients who commit crime. The course will introduce students to
the relationship between mental health, drug addiction, crime and violence. Students will be
involved in mock trials, debates and case write ups. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG103) or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or PSYC-101 or equivalent
course(s).) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-313 
Introduction to Infectious Diseases
This is an advanced course in the mechanisms by which bacteria and fungi cause disease in
humans. The course topics include the clinical signs of each disease, diagnosis of each disease,
pathogenic mechanisms used by the organisms to cause disease, treatment of the disease, and
prevention of the disease. The laboratory component of this course will consist of a mixture
of methodologies used in the identification of the infectious agents, evaluation of the host
response to the infection, case studies, student presentations of articles related to infectious
disease and other assignments aimed at deepening the understanding the infectious disease
process. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-315 
Medical Pathophysiology
This course is designed as an introductory course in pathophysiology, the study of disease and
its consequences. It covers the basic mechanisms of disease, concentrating on the diseases
that are most frequently encountered in clinical practice. The major topics of discussion will
emphasize the general pathologic processes; this will provide a basis for understanding diseases affecting specific organ systems. Clinical correlations will be made as examples of how
physiological processes can go awry in the generation of a particular disease. (Prerequisites:
(MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MEDS-320 
Mastering EKG and Arrhythmia Interpretation
This course combines theory and practice, covering the basic anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, and terminology of the heart as well as key features of arrhythmias, their physiological
consequences, signs and symptoms, accurate diagnosis and management. Through an extensive
practical and “hands-on” experience with electrocardiography (EKG) machines, presentations,
discussions, and clinical cases, students will learn how to perform EKGs, recognize arrhythmias
and describe the differences between EKG rhythm assessments and 12-Lead EKG interpretation. This course meets the needs of many healthcare professionals. This course is designed to
prepare to sit for the Cardiac Rhythm Analysis Technician (CRAT) certification examination.
(General Biology or permission of instructor) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Int)
MEDS-330 Immunology
Introduction to all of the fundamental facts and concepts related to immunology to include:
innate immunity and adaptive immunity: cells, molecules, tissues and organs of the immune
system; cell-cell communication and interaction; antibody structure and function; and the
applications of these concepts to infectious diseases, vaccine design, autoimmune diseases,
cancer, transplantation, regulation of the immune response, allergic reactions and immunosuppression. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-333 
Patient Care
This course will introduce key elements of integrated, high-quality patient care. Through lecture, role-play and hands-on practice, essential aspects of team-based patient care will be
explored. Vital skills and behaviors such as professionalism, communication, documentation,
workplace safety, patient assessment, patient positioning and transfers, and acute medical
situations will be presented. Infection control, medications and their administration, and medical-legal issues will also be examined. (Prerequisites: (BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or (BIOL-121
and BIOL-122) or (1001-251 and 1001-252 and 1001-253) or (1001-201 and 1001-202 and 1001203) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

53

College of Health Sciences and Technology

MEDS-345 
Case-Based Genetic Counseling
This course will provide students with an inside look at the profession of genetic counseling and
its patients through in-depth case studies of actual patient scenarios, role playing and lectures
focused on realistic challenges faced by genetic counselors. This course will focus on combining scientific information about genetic disorders with the psychosocial aspects of counseling
sessions that will give provide an accurate perspective of the profession. Students will participate in role playing exercises, keep detailed journals and participate in mock patient interviews.
(Prerequisites: MEDS-245 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-350 
Exercise Physiology
Exercise Physiology is the scientific basis for the field of exercise science. This course provides students with an opportunity to deepen their understanding of the body’s responses
and adaptations to exercise. Neuromuscular physiology is reviewed along with energy systems and mechanisms of fatigue. The cardiorespiratory system is examined with a focus on
control and regulation during activity and there is a look at the physiological components of
exercise training. Environmental factors that impact sport activities as well as training techniques which optimize performance will be reviewed. The differences in performance and
adaptation that exist between children, adolescents and adults as well as between males and
females will be compared and contrasted. Exercises influence on long term health and fitness
will conclude the course. Laboratory experiences will allow students to integrate and apply the
concepts of exercise physiology through investigative experiments. There is no separate lab for
this class and laboratory experiences will be incorporated into specifically designated lecture
times. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-351 
Sports Psychology
“Keeping your head in the game” is one of the hallmarks of success for high performance athletes and this course explores the psychological aspects of achieving that capability. Through
examining research based evidence of successful practices and techniques to produce, that
winning edge, students will become versed in the process of coaching athletes to possess
and function with athletic “mental toughness.” (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103)
or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and 1026-231) or
(1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or equivalent
course(s).) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-352 
Coaching Healthy Behavior
This course will teach students to encourage those with long standing lifestyle habits that contribute to their chronic illness to change is a very challenging proposition. It addresses this
problem by incorporating psychological, sociological and counseling principles, along with
coaching skills, into an intervention technique that emphasizes the positive and leads people
to choose and adhere to a wellness lifestyle. Students will review case studies and meet with
professionals in the field. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103) or (MEDG-102 and
MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and 1026-231) or (1026-212 and 1026232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or equivalent course(s).) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-353 
Worksite Health Promotion
A growing number of employers are recognizing the value of healthier, more physically fit
employees and are providing health promotion programs through a variety of innovative
means. This course will examine the theoretical basis for employee health programs as well
review several case studies. Students will have the opportunity to visit and review local programs as well as design a model program to present to the class. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101
and MEDG-103) or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and
1026-231) or (1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251
or equivalent course(s).) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-360 
Placebo, Suggestion, Research and Health
This course provides a foundation for understanding the history and science of placebo effects
with a focus on how these effects influence research design, therapeutics and health. A model
of placebo effects — comprised of conditioning, expectation, social influence and paradigm
— is developed and applied to both health and common diseases in order to recognize that
all health interventions are at least placebos. The question is whether they are anything more.
The course structure and process include assigned readings, quizzes, creative class projects,
studying advertisements, hearing from pharmaceutical company representatives, and class
discussion designed to provoke critical thinking. (Prerequisites: (BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or
(BIOL-121 and BIOL-122) or (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103 and MEDG-102 and MEDG-104)
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

54	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MEDS-361 
Applied Psychophysiology and Self-Regulation
Learn how to change your mind. This course explores the evolving field of psychophysiology
and its applications for therapeutic self-regulation in health care as well as its implications
for the related fields of psychology, biomedical engineering, computer science, and medical
economics. By focusing on the mind as an emergent phenomenon of bidirectional brain and
body interaction, we realize how much of our own physiology we can and do self-regulate. We
will review research on hypnosis, biofeedback, meditative strategies and psychophysiological
monitoring. The course structure integrates lecture, demonstration, discussion and individual self-monitoring projects. Weekly quizzes provide feedback on learning. (Prerequisites:
(BIOL-101 and BIOL-102) or (BIOL-121 and BIOL-122) or (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103 and
MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-370 
Community Healthcare
This seminar course is a unique opportunity for students who are seriously interested in
pursuing a career in healthcare. The course will focus on the study of key issues concerning
community health care and developing practical approaches to supporting patients. Students
consider obstacles to effective health care as well as strategies for enabling at-risk patients
to play more active roles in promoting his or her health and well-being. Topics covered in
the course include: challenges of delivering adequate healthcare in communities; population
medicine; specific problems posed by diabetes, obesity and cardiovascular disease; ethical
dimensions of the concept of “underinsurance”; community medicine and the law; and methods of improving compliance and measuring outcomes. Students in the course will be expected
to undertake at least one subsequent semester of volunteering as a health coach with Rochester
Regional Health System. Students must have reliable transportation to and from various sites
to serve as a health coach. Two months prior to registration, students complete an application
and interview to be accepted into this course. Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
MEDS-401 
Medical Physiology Case Studies
The course will use case study analysis to explore aspects of human medical physiology; the
integration of multiple organ systems in the maintenance of homeostasis; and the etiology,
development, diagnosis, and treatment of various human diseases. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250
and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-402 
Medical Ethics Case Studies
The course will use case study analysis to explore some of the key ethical principles, guidelines,
and regulations that inform decisions made in clinical medical practice, including issues of
informed consent, refusal of care, end-of-life decisions, termination of treatment, and physician assisted death. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360)
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-403 
US Healthcare and Medical Education
The course will explore the beginnings of the healthcare delivery in America, the economics of
the healthcare enterprise, and the education of physicians and other healthcare professionals. It
will also explore the role of government in providing and regulating the delivery of healthcare
services as well as ethical issues that affect the doctor-patient relationship. Finally, the course
will examine the healthcare systems of other industrialized nations and compare and contrast
those systems with that of the U.S. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350
and 1026-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-405 
Human Development I
This course will provide a survey of the primary biological events, mechanisms and underpinnings of human development from conception through adolescence. It will use case studies,
human clinical and laboratory research papers to enrich and illustrate key points related to
important developmental milestones. A significant emphasis will be placed on understanding
developmental disabilities, and also in relating biological events to an individual’s larger psychosocial functioning. (Prerequisites: MEDS-422 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
MEDS-406 
Human Development II
This course will examine key biological, biochemical, neuroendocrine and neuropsychological events and mechanisms related to human adulthood and aging. We will use case studies,
human clinical and laboratory research papers to enrich and illustrate key points from lecture
material. A significant emphasis will be placed upon understanding aging-related degenerative
diseases of the nervous system, muscle, cardiopulmonary and immune systems. (Prerequisites:
MEDS-422 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
MEDS-407 
Prevention and Treatment of Athletic Injuries
Even the very best athletes experience injury and being able to recognize and respond to those
conditions is a crucial skill for those who will work with athletes. Students will learn the signs
and symptoms of injury and the process of first response as well as how to support athletes
through rehab. Successful students will learn how to incorporate injury reduction techniques
into the training programs they develop for the athletes they serve. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101
and MEDG-103) or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and
1026-231) or (1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251
or equivalent course(s).) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Health Sciences and Technology

MEDS-410 Kinesiology
As a study of human movement this course will cover topics that begin with a review of the functional anatomy of the musculo-skeletal system including both the upper and lower extremity
as well as the spinal column and thorax. Factors of linear and rotary motion are reviewed along
with postural analysis and movement elements associated with pushing, pulling and throwing
objects. There is no separate Lab for this class and laboratory experiences will be incorporated
into specifically designated lecture times. At the conclusion of this course students will have a
functional capability to assess the intricacies of human movement. (Prerequisites: MEDS-250
or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-413 
Training High Performance Athletes
Aerobic capacity, strength, flexibility, speed, power, agility, nutrition, and rest are all crucial
to the success of athletes and for trainers the need to appropriately coordinate all these factors is a significant challenge. This course explores the interrelationship of the multifactoral
principles of athletic performance. Using case studies, modeling, flow sheets and scheduling
plans students develop techniques that will lead athletes to success in their training routines.
(Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103) or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or
BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and 1026-231) or (1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or equivalent course(s).) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-415 
Pathophysiology of Organ Systems I
This course is designed to provide the students with the necessary foundation of the physiologic and pathologic processes that underlie the spectrum of human disease entities and is
taught in the context of clinical scenarios that demonstrate the basic science principles in a
real-world context of health care. Emphasis is placed on the fundamental principles of cell
injury and repair, infection, neoplasia, and inflammation as well as hemodynamic disorders,
thromboembolic disease and shock. Additional emphasis is placed on organ systems and their
disorders such as the circulatory, liver, gallbladder and biliary systems. Material is presented
in the context of case studies, utilizing clinical findings and addressing underlying basic physiologic, biochemical and immunologic processes as they relate to patient care and individual
patient problem cases. (Prerequisites: Restricted to studente in the College of Health Sciences
& Technology with at least 3rd year standing who have completed MEDS-250 and MEDS-251
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-416 
Pathophysiology of Organ Systems II
This course is second in a sequence designed to provide the students with the necessary foundation of knowledge and under-standing of the physiologic and pathologic processes that
underlie the spectrum of human disease entities and is taught in the context of clinical scenarios that demonstrate the basic science principles in a real-world context of health care.
Emphasis is placed on the pathophysiology of the central nervous system, lower urinary tract,
male and female reproductive organs, gastrointestinal tract, spleen, pancreas, kidneys and
endocrine system. Material is presented in the context of case studies, utilizing clinical findings and addressing underlying basic physiologic, biochemical and immunologic processes as
they relate to patient care and individual patient problem cases. (Prerequisites: MEDS-415 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-417 
Clinical Microbiology
Clinical microbiology is a detailed study of the bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites relevant
to human infectious diseases, in-cluding their historical significance and impact on society.
This course will also focus on giving the student an appreciation and clear understanding of
emerging/re-emerging infectious disease agents particularly those infectious disease agents
commonly encountered in a hospital setting. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-418 
Clinical Microbiology Lab
Clinical microbiology is a detailed study of the bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites relevant to
human infectious diseases, in-cluding their historical significance and impact on society. This
course provides a hands-on experience in identifying these types of agents. The course will also
focus on giving the student an appreciation and clear understanding of emerging/re-emerging
in-fectious disease agents particularly those infectious disease agents commonly encountered
in a hospital setting. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course. Co-requisites: MEDS-417
or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall)
MEDS-420 
Human Histology
This foundational course in the study of human biology and medicine provides students with
a detailed exploration of the microscopic and structural anatomy of normal human tissues
and organs, with special emphasis given to the relationships between the cellular architecture
of human organs and organ systems and their functions. The course also examines human
pathologies as a manifestation of the loss of cellular integrity leading to alterations in the histological features of diseased organs. (Prerequisites: MEDS-250 and MEDS-251 and BIOL-201
or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)

	

MEDS-421 Parasitology
Introduction to parasites of medical importance and the diseases they cause. It includes study
of a variety of parasites classified by diseases such as blood and intestinal protozoan parasites,
nematodes, trematodes and cestodes. Examples of important parasitic diseases to be covered
include malaria, sleeping sickness, elephantiasis, river blindness, leishmaniasis, amebic dysentery and babesiosis. Coursework includes an examination of the distribution and transmission,
pathogenesis, clinical signs and symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and control. Contribution
of parasitic infections to economic and health inequities between developed and developing
countries will be analyzed. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 or MEDG-102 or BIOL-101 or BIOL102 or BIOL-121 or BIOL-122 or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or 1026-211 or equivalent courses) and
at least 3rd year student standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-422 Endocrinology
This course will combine lecture, literature review and small group discussions/presentations to
introduce students to the fundamental concepts of human endocrinology. Topics covered will
include: digestion and metabolism; growth and aging; arousal/mood; sexual dimorphism and
reproduction; and neuroendocrinology. Discussion of relevant human diseases/disorders will
be used to illustrate related biochemical/anatomical pathways and mechanisms. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-201 and MEDS-250 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MEDS-425 
Introduction to Neuroscience
This course will focus on the human nervous system, and its regulation of behavior and complex
function. Background information on neuroanatomy, cellular physiology, neurotransmission,
and signaling mechanisms will pave the way for an in-depth analysis of specialization at the
systems level. Our goal will be to understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying normal human behaviors and pathogenic states. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 and MEDS-250
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-426 
Addiction Pharmacology
This course will explore the general concepts, social consequences, policy, and other aspects
of substance abuse and addiction. Multiple perspectives will be presented, including those
of addicts, health-care providers, and family/friends affected by addiction. Then, commonly
abused drugs will be discussed in detail. Topics to be presented and discussed for each drug
class include: epidemiology, pathophysiology, drug class information, pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamics actions, short-term and long-term consequences of misuse (including
overdose), and contemporary pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment modalities. Availability of resources used to address substance abuse will also be presented. Lastly, the
course will require visit(s) to one or more of the following meetings: alcoholics anonymous,
narcotics anonymous, Al-Anon, and/or Nar-Anon. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251)
or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-430 
Epidemiology and Public Health
The course covers applications of epidemiology to the study of the distribution and determinants of health and diseases, morbidity, injuries, disability, and mortality in populations.
Epidemiologic methods for the control of conditions such as infectious and chronic diseases, community and environmental health hazards, and unintentional injuries are discussed.
Other topics include quantitative aspects of epidemiology, including data sources; measures
of morbidity and mortality; evaluation of association and causality; and various study design
methods. Contemporary topics in public health (e.g. swine flu, HIV/AIDS, SARS), outbreak
investigation and containment strategies will be examined, analyzed and thoroughly discussed.
(Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 or MEDG-102 or BIOL-101 or BIOL-102 or BIOL-121 or BIOL122 or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or 1026-211 or equivalent courses) and at least 3rd year student
standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-440H 
Cardiac Imaging
This is an upper division course for students interested in the medical imaging of the heart.
Students will review the anatomy and physiology of the heart and learn about the different
imaging techniques used in the clinical diagnosis and assessment of cardiac disease or disorders. Students will read, discuss, and present related journal articles related to the subject
matter. (Prerequisites: (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-450 
Athletic Assessment
Gathering and analyzing data in order to establish the need and effectiveness of athletic training interventions is the focus of this course. Students will learn sport specific protocols and
become familiar with analytical software as well as develop proficiency in the application of
data in the design and implementation of training programs. (Prerequisites: MEDS-350 or
equivalent course.MEDS-350 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

55

College of Health Sciences and Technology

MEDS-451 
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Following a heart attack many people feel as though their health is lost, however those who
participate in a cardiac rehabilitation program experience a much higher rate of recovery.
Students will explore the physiological principles of rehabilitation through a thorough review
of atherosclerosis and the process of adaptation by the cardiovascular system to proper exercise.
Through the class, students will visit local cardiac rehab programs and design exercise prescriptions and educational programs for case studies. (Prerequisites: (MEDG-101 and MEDG-103)
or (MEDG-102 and MEDG-104) or BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or (1026-211 and 1026-231) or
(1026-212 and 1026-232) or (1026-213 and 1026-233) or 1001-201 or 1001-251 or equivalent
course(s).) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-452 Biomechanics
The study of mechanics as it pertains to living organisms is the basis of biomechanics. Principles
of physics are applied to human motion with movements being analyzed for their relationship to statics and dynamics. Kinematics and kinetics are explored within the context of sports
performance and functional human locomotion. (Prerequisites: MEDS-250 and PHYS-112 or
equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-470 
Transition of Care
In the course the students will reflect on the fundamentals they have learned in the classroom
and have put into practice while working with patients. The course includes informal and formal
writing assignments. Topics addressed include the following: the role of different healthcare
providers, e.g. the health coach; understanding sensitivity and diversity; logistics of the health
care system — in-patient and out-patient. (Prerequisites: MEDS-370 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-489 
Special Topics
This course is an upper division course on a topic of special interest that is not part of a formal
curriculum. The course design may differ by topic or faculty member but will include prerequisites, contact hours, and examination/assessment procedures. The level of study is appropriate
for students in their final two years of study. Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MEDS-490 
Human Gross Anatomy
This course exposes students to details of human anatomy through cadaver dissection. Lecture
material stresses functional and clinical correlates corresponding to laboratory exercises.
(Prerequisites: (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and 1026-360) or equivalent courses.) Lab 6, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
MEDS-499 
Biomedical Sciences Co-op
One semester of paid work experience in a healthcare related field. Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
MEDS-501 
Human Development
This course will provide a survey of the primary biological events, mechanisms and underpinnings of human development from conception through aging. It will use case studies, human
clinical and laboratory research papers to enrich and illustrate key points related to human
developmental milestones. A significant emphasis will be placed on understanding developmental disabilities and adult-onset degenerative disorders, and also in relating biological events
to an individual’s larger psychosocial functioning. Students will also improve professional
communication skills through discussions, writing and revision. (Prerequisites: MEDS-422
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MEDS-510 
Biomedical Research
This course provides an opportunity for in-depth experiential learning through collaborative
work on an independent research project. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
MEDS-511 
Interdisciplinary Research
This course will provide an independent, interdisciplinary research opportunity to enhance the
experiential learning component of the Biomedical Sciences Program. Students will engage in
preparatory reading and original research in an academic discipline or environment outside of
their immediate major. Proposed work may span a broad variety of disciplines within a unifying theme of project goals and potential outcomes with strong application to human health and
development. Examples may include mechanical, electrical or biomedical engineering: imaging
science and optics; entrepreneurship and biotechnology; epidemiology, community health and
public policy. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MEDS-589 
Special Topics
This course is an upper division course on a topic of special interest that is not part of a formal
curriculum. The course design may differ by topic or faculty member but will include prerequisites, contact hours, and examination/assessment procedures. The level of study is appropriate
for students in their final two years of study. Lecture, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

56	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MEDS-599 
Independent Study
This course will provide students the opportunity for independent study in a topic of strong
interest. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Diagnostic Medical Sonography
DMSO-301 
Sonographic Scanning Skills and Techniques I
The course provides students with hands-on experience by performing basic and general
abdominal, small parts, obstetrical and gynecological ultrasound examinations. Sonographic
examination protocols and techniques, review and recognition of normal anatomic structures,
high quality image production, and image interpretation are stressed. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT
YR 3 Prereq) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
DMSO-302 
Sonographic Scanning Skills and Techniques II
The course is a continuation of Sonographic Scanning Skills and Techniques I (DMSO- 301).
The course provides students with further hands-on opportunities to perform advanced abdominal and OB/GYN, peripheral vascular (upper and lower) and carotid Doppler examinations
including color flow. Ultrasound examination protocols and techniques, review and recognition of normal anatomic structures, high quality image production, Doppler and color flow
optimization and image interpretation are stressed. (Prerequisites: DMSO-301 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
DMSO-309 
Sonography Physics and Instrumentation I
This course addresses how the principles of ultrasound physics are directly applied to the use
of ultrasound instrumentation in medical imaging. Transducers, signal production, memory
systems, data display, manipulation of controls, and artifacts, are discussed. Throughout the
course, the student will integrate previous knowledge of anatomy with ultrasound physics
and instrumentation. (Prerequisites: PHYS-112 or equivalent course and student standing in
DMSO-CT, DMSO-BS or ECHO-CT.PHYS-112 & DMSO OR ECHO) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits
3 (Fall)
DMSO-310 
Sonography Physics and Instrumentation II
This course is a continuation of Sonography Physics and Instrumentation I (DMSO-309). It
provides a foundation of the basic physical principles of ultrasound and the fundamentals of
fluid dynamics, Doppler physics including color, power, and spectral Doppler, quality control,
Doppler artifacts, and biological effects. Students will learn to integrate previous knowledge
of anatomy, ultrasound physics and instrumentation with Doppler skills and techniques.
Development of scanning techniques, use of instrument controls, and production of high quality diagnostic images utilizing laboratory equipment are stressed. (Prerequisites: DMSO-309
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
DMSO-312 
Human Cross-Sectional Anatomy
This course covers basic sectional anatomy of the abdomen, pelvis, fetus and small parts, building on the basic knowledge of anatomy. This course prepares the student to recognize sectional
anatomy of major human structures, especially as they relate to medical imaging techniques.
Lectures are augmented with exercises using prepared human sections, organ modeling and
diagnostic imaging units. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT YR 3 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
DMSO-414 
Sonographic Vascular Evaluation
This course provides knowledge of general vascular evaluation with an emphasis on the
Sonographic approach. Two-dimensional real-time imaging and Doppler techniques are presented as well as a discussion of other imaging modalities and their use in vascular evaluation.
Performance of examinations on laboratory equipment is stressed. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT YR
4 Prereq) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
DMSO-452 
Obstetrical Sonography I
This course provides the ultrasound candidate with the knowledge necessary to perform obstetrical examinations. High-quality image production, recognition of normal structures and basic
pathologic states are stressed. Examination protocols, review of specific anatomy and pathology,
film reading, and use of other imaging techniques are also addressed. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT
YR 4 Prereq) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
DMSO-453 
Gynecological Sonography
This course provides information necessary to perform basic and advanced gynecologic
Sonographic examinations. Examination strategies for various procedures are explored, as
well as the integration of ultrasound into established clinical practices. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT
YR 4 Prereq) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
DMSO-454 
Obstetrical Sonography II
This course provides information necessary to perform more sophisticated obstetrical procedures utilizing ultrasound equipment. Examination strategies for various procedures are
explored as well as the integration of ultrasound into established clinical practices. (DMSOBS, DMSO-CT YR 4 Prereq) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Health Sciences and Technology

DMSO-456 
Abdominal and Small Parts Sonography I
Laboratory simulation and classroom instruction are used to develop practical skills and clinical
knowledge necessary to perform basic abdominal and small parts examinations utilizing ultrasound equipment. High-quality image production, recognition of normal abdominal structures
and basic pathologic states are stressed. Examination protocols, review of anatomy, film reading and use of other scanning techniques are addressed. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT YR 4 Prereq)
Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
DMSO-457 
Abdominal and Small Parts Sonography II
This course is a continuation of Abdominal and Small Parts Sonography I (DMSO-456).
Laboratory simulation and classroom instruction are used to develop the practical skills and
clinical knowledge necessary to perform basic and advanced abdominal and small parts examinations utilizing ultrasound. High-quality image production, recognition of normal abdominal
structures and basic and advanced pathologic states are stressed. Examination protocols, review
of anatomy, film reading and use of other scanning techniques are addressed. (DMSO-BS,
DMSO-CT YR 4 Prereq) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
DMSO-460 
Administration and Research in Sonography
Speaking, writing and researching skills are explored. Methods of basic research, developing
writing strategies and oral presentations are stressed. Students develop or critique a research
project and prepare a written document following common publishing guidelines in addition
to making oral presentations. Additionally, candidates prepare a complete plan for an ultrasound department as if they had been hired to establish a new department in a hospital setting.
The candidates work together to develop the physical facilities, administrative, and financial
aspects of a department. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT YR 4 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
DMSO-570 
Clinical Sonography I
This course prepares the student for application of classroom knowledge to the practice of
ultrasound by means of a clinical internship. Performing basic general ultrasound examinations in the areas of abdomen, small parts, obstetrics, gynecology and basic peripheral vascular
in both the laboratory and clinical settings is stressed. Nursing procedures, ethical issues and
medico-legal considerations are also discussed as they relate to the practice of ultrasound
examinations. This is an internship course. (DMSO-BS, DMSO-CT YR 4 Prereq) Lecture/
Lab 7, Credits 7 (Fall)
DMSO-571 
Clinical Sonography II
This course provides the final development of ultrasound examination skills by means of clinical internship. The candidate is expected to perform basic and advanced general ultrasound
examinations in the areas of abdomen, small parts, obstetrics, gynecology and peripheral ultrasound examinations with no assistance by the end of this course. This is an internship course.
(Prerequisites: DMSO-570 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 5 (Spring)

Echocardiography
ECHO-305 
Cardiac Sectional Anatomy and Physiology
Course is designed to provide students an opportunity to learn the basic anatomy, physiology,
basic pathophysiology, and terminology of the heart. Standard views, image orientation, ultrasound appearance and measurements will be stressed. Students will be required to dissect and
label all sections of the human heart. Students are guided in the learning process by lecture and
self-paced laboratory experience. (ECHO-CT & COREQ ECHO-307) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECHO-307 
Echocardiographic Scanning Skills and Techniques I
This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to learn cardiac imaging
procedures, sectional anatomy, and patient positions. Standard views, image orientation, ultrasound appearance and measurements will be stressed. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted
to students in ECHO-CT who have completed (MEDS-250 and MEDS-251) or (1026-350 and
1026-360).Co-requisite: ECHO-305 or equivalent course.) Lab 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
ECHO-308 
Echocardiographic Scanning Skills and Techniques II
This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to learn advanced cardiac
imaging procedures, sectional anatomy, and patient positions. In-depth and advanced review of
standard views, image orientation, ultrasound appearance and measurements will be stressed.
(Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT who have completed ECHO307 or equivalent course.) Lab 1, Credits 1 (Spring)
ECHO-320 
Electrophysiology and Cardiac Pharmacology
This course exposes the student to the role of the electrocardiogram in clinical medicine and
its correlation with the echocardiographic examination. The student learns how to perform
a 12 Lead electrocardiogram and interpret a normal EKG. Abnormal EKG morphology, conduction disturbances, and rhythms are taught. Implications of abnormalities are discussed.
(Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2
(Spring)

	

ECHO-401 
Echocardiography I
This course is designed to provide the echocardiography student with the necessary foundation
of knowledge and understanding to deal with the patient in a clinical context. It also provides the student with the information necessary to perform basic and semi-advanced cardiac
procedures utilizing 2-D imaging, M-mode, spectral and color Doppler. High-quality image
production, recognition of normal cardiac structures and pathologic states relating to various
types of cardiomypoathy, murmurs and valvular heart disease and cardiac transplantation are
stressed. Examination protocols for various procedures, review of anatomy, film reading and
use of other scanning techniques and modalities are addressed. This is an internship course.
(Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECHO-402 
Echocardiography II
A continuation of ECHO-401. The course is designed to provide the echocardiography student with the necessary foundation of knowledge and understanding to deal with the patient
in a clinical context. It also provides the student with the information necessary to perform
advanced and sophisticated cardiac procedures utilizing 2-D imaging, M-mode, spectral and
color Doppler. High-quality image production, recognition of normal cardiac structures and
pathologic states relating to cardiac diseases secondary to systemic illness, infiltrative heart,
neuromuscular, and connective tissue diseases, endocrine and nutritional diseases, hematological disorders, AIDS, and pericardial diseases, cardiac tumors and thrombi, and diseases of the
great vessels are stressed. Examination protocols for various procedures, review of anatomy,
film reading and use of other scanning techniques and modalities are addressed. This is an
internship course. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT that have
completed ECHO-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ECHO-410 
Ischemic Heart Disease: Stress Echocardiography
This course is an introduction to stress echocardiography. Emphasis is placed on the basic
coronary artery anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, medical indications, fundamental principles, techniques and scan interpretation. Various methods of stress echocardiography such as
digital, exercise, and pharmacological echocardiography are stressed. Students observe and perform these procedures during a clinical internship. This is an internship course. (Prerequisites:
This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
ECHO-415 
Cardiac M-Mode
Classroom and laboratory experience will provide the candidate with basic knowledge necessary to perform M-mode scans. High-quality image production, measurements, recognition of
normal structures and basic pathologic states will be stressed. Examination protocols, review
of specific anatomy, film reading, and use of other scanning techniques will be addressed.
This is an internship course. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHOCT.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
ECHO-420 
Clinical Echocardiography I
This course prepares the student for application of classroom knowledge to the practice of
echocardiography by means of a clinical internship. Performing basic, and some advanced
echocardiography examinations in both the laboratory and clinical settings is stressed. Nursing
procedures, ethical issues and medico-legal considerations are also discussed as they relate to
the practice of echocardiography. The candidate is expected to perform basic and advanced
examinations with little, if any, assistance by the end of this course. This is an internship course.
(Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT.) INT 4, Credits 4 (Fall)
ECHO-421 
Clinical Echocardiography II
This course provides the final development of echocardiography examination skills by means
of clinical internship. The candidate is expected to perform general, advanced and sophisticated echocardiography examinations with no assistance by the end of this course. This is an
internship course. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT that have
completed ECHO-420 or equivalent course.) INT 4, Credits 4 (Spring)
ECHO-425 
Seminar in Echocardiography
This course is designed to introduce the student to the role of the echocardiograher, ethical
issues and career opportunities in the medical field as well as provide an overview of the fiscal
and daily operations of an echocardiography department. Speaking, writing, and researching
skills are explored. This course also presents methods for researching a selected topic, developing paper-writing strategies, and making oral presentations. Students will research a topic
and prepare a written document following common publishing guidelines in addition to making oral presentations. This is an internship course. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted to
students in ECHO-CT.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
ECHO-430 
Congenital Heart Disease I
This course is designed to provide the echocardiography student with the necessary foundation
of knowledge and understanding of congenital heart disease with an emphasis on the ultrasound approach. Two-dimensional real-time imaging and Doppler techniques are presented.
Performance on laboratory equipment is stressed. This is an internship course. (Prerequisites:
This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT.) INT 2, Credits 2 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

57

College of Health Sciences and Technology

ECHO-431 
Congenital Heart Disease II
A continuation of ECHO-430. This course is designed to provide the echocardiography student
with the necessary foundation of knowledge and understanding of advanced congenital heart
disease with an emphasis on the ultrasound approach. Two-dimensional, real-time imaging
and Doppler techniques are presented. Performance on laboratory equipment is stressed. This
is an internship course. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT that
have completed ECHO-430 or equivalent course.) INT 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
ECHO-465 
Echocardiography Special Procedures
This course introduces the echocardiography student to the various techniques, procedures, and
skills necessary to evaluate the heart. Topics include transesophageal and contrast echocardiography, and pericardiocentesis. The role of echocardiography in emergency medicine, operating
rooms, and intensive care units is stressed. This is an internship course. (Prerequisites: This
course is restricted to students in ECHO-CT.) INT 2, Credits 2 (Spring)

Health Systems Administration
HLTH-300 
Health Care Systems and Operations
This course will provide an overview of the health care system in the United States. It includes
a historical perspective, discussion of trends and contemporary issues of health care delivery.
Building on this information, an overview will be provided of how health care facilities are organized and managed focusing on the application of general management principles unique to
health care environments. A perspective will be provided on organizational structures, planning and performance monitoring, personnel management, finance and the respective roles of
medical professionals and administrators who work within health facilities. Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall)
HLTH-310 
Health Care Quality Assurance
This course will provide an introduction to quality assurance in health care. It explores past
and current definitions of quality and competing concepts of quality assurance. It also reviews:
existing quality assurance requirements; accrediting organizations; federal and state agencies,
and third party payers. Descriptions and explanations of quality assurance methods, tools, and
their application in various settings will also be addressed. (Enrollment in this course requires
permission from the department offering the course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HLTH-315 
Reinventing Health Care
This course discusses reinventing health care in our country. Specifically the course will review
the current status of American health care including research into population demographics
and health, and the concept of wellness and prevention. We will review the role of health care
reform in reinventing health care. Following this we review international health care models
as we consider best practice as alternative care models for consideration for the US. Third the
students will develop, for their area of interest and expertise, a strategy for incremental or radical innovation in how we provide health care to our constituents. This course is offered on-line.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HLTH-320 
Legal Aspects of Health Care
This course provides an on overview of statues and regulations as they apply to the health care
system. Topics include: an overview of the American legal system; licensure of institutions;
licensure and discipline of practitioners; physician-patient relationship; reproductive issues;
the right to die; organ donations; medical records; legal liability; malpractice; and labor law.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HLTH-325 
Health Care Leadership
Highly trained clinical and administrative professionals drive the nature of work in health care.
The purpose of this course is to provide students the opportunity to study leadership theory as
it is applied in health care organizations. Leadership theories and applications geared toward
professionals working in health service organizations will be emphasized. Students will learn
to apply leadership theories via case studies and issue analysis of their active work environments. This course is offered on-line. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HLTH-330 
Health Planning and Program Development
This course provides a review of the methodology of planning effectively for health care services.
The use of data systems and the methods of forecasting, identifying, and analyzing problems
are explored. The course will all address the process of strategic planning, setting priorities,
developing projects and allocating resources. Students prepare actual application for new programs to regulatory agencies. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Medical Illustration
ILLM-399 
Medical Illustration Part-time Coop
The medical illustration co-op will provide students with the opportunity to work alongside
of practicing medical illustrators in various branches of the profession. Students may apply
forcCo-ops with businesses and educational institutions based on the availability of positions
and company job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the
Co-op Form to enroll. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time
(10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall,
spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ILLM-498 
Medical Illustration Internship
The medical illustration internship will provide students with the option to work with practicing professionals in a business or educational environment. Students may apply for internships
to businesses and educational institutions based on the availability of positions and company needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Internship
Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
ILLM-499 
Medical Illustration Coop
The medical illustration co-op will provide students with the opportunity to work alongside of
practicing medical illustrators in various branches of the profession. Students may apply for
Co-ops with businesses and educational institutions based on the availability of positions and
company job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Co-op
Form to enroll. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
ILLM-501 
Human Gross Anatomy
An in-depth study of the structure of the human body. Emphasis is on understanding the relationships between anatomical structures as well as their form, texture, and color. Dissection
of a human cadaver is supplemented with lectures on the structure and function of the major
organ systems. (Prerequisites: MEDS-251 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 6 (Fall)
ILLM-502 
Illustrating Human Anatomy
Drawings of lab dissections and the skeleton will be translated into illustrations designed to
support instruction in Human Gross Anatomy. Course teaches what choices need to be made
when translating literal drawings into illustrations that support instruction. The target learner
for these illustrations is a student attending Human Gross Anatomy at a graduate level. (This
course is restricted to students with 3rd year standing in the ILLM-BFA program.) Studio 5,
Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLM-503 
3D Modeling of Organic Forms
This course introduces strategies used to create NURBS and polygonal models of organic subjects in a three-dimensional environment. Assignments stress accurate portrayal of proportions,
form, and texture. Instruction will also focus on creating lighting and shader networks that
emphasize form and are consistent with surface characteristics. (Prerequisites: FDTN-131 or
equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLM-507 
Computer Applications in Medical Illustration
Students will learn to use industry-standard raster and vector illustration software to create
images of assigned medical subjects. Students will also use page layout applications to combine digital images with text and other graphic elements. Coursework emphasizes creation
of illustrations to support medical education and publishing. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and
FDTN-122 and MEDG-102 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2, Studio 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-508 
Scientific Visualization
Emerging technologies enable scientists to visualize structures that are otherwise invisible to
the naked eye. For example, molecular visualization software allows us to construct highly
accurate molecular models from x-ray crystallography and other structural data. Cryo-EM
and confocal microscopy are revealing the previously unknown structure of cellular organelles.
Medical imaging systems allow us to reconstruct the human body in three dimensions from
actual patient data (CT scans, MRI, etc.). This course explores the use of these technologies
to provide references for traditional artwork and to export models for digital rendering and
animation. (Prerequisites: ILLM-501 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-512 
Surgical Illustration
Students observe live surgical procedures and translate their sketches into finished illustrations that are used in medical training, patient education, and litigation. Demonstrations of
sketching and rendering techniques are supplemented with lectures on general surgical principles and common procedures. (Prerequisites: ILLM-501 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)

58	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Health Sciences and Technology

ILLM-515 
Contemporary Media I
This course is an introduction to two-dimensional computer illustration, animation, and interactive media as they apply to contemporary methods of instruction in medicine and allied
health. Students will be assigned topics in health care and develop an interactive lesson to support instruction of their topic. Students will organize these lessons as a web site. (Prerequisites:
ILLM-507 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLM-516 
Contemporary Media II
This course continues the development of a student-created web site designed to assist teaching
topics in medicine and allied health. Advanced topics in two-dimensional computer illustration, animation, and interactive media as they apply to contemporary methods of instruction
in medicine and allied health, will be presented. (Prerequisites: ILLM-515 or equivalent course.
ILLM-515 Prereq) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-517 
Portfolio and Business Practices
This course helps prepare students to enter the workforce in full-time positions or as freelance
illustrators. Students create a traditional portfolio, personal identity package, and marketing
materials. The course also introduces important business concepts such as copyright, licensing, pricing, contracts, taxation, and formation of a proper business. (This course is restricted
to 4th year students in the ILLM-BFA program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-518 
Eye Ear and Nose Prosthetics
Eye Ear Nosemaking is an introduction to maxillofacial prosthetics. Focusing on anaplastology with additional work in the process of artificial eye-making, students will create life masks
on which orbitals, noses and ears can be modeled, cast and produced. Lecture 2, Studio 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-599 
Medical Illustration Independent Study
Medical Illustration Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a
specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty
advisor will propose a course of study. Medical Illustration Independent Study students must
obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to
enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Nutrition Management
NUTR-210 
Nutrition and the Mediterranean Diet
This course provides a study of the Mediterranean Diet and culture through a combination
of course work at RIT during spring semester culminating in a 9 day trip to Croatia at the
end of the semester. The focus of this course is on understanding the unique characteristics
of the Mediterranean Diet and the effect of adhering to the diet on one’s health. The course
will compare the Mediterranean Diet to other ethnic cuisines and MyPlate food guide tools.
The student will become familiar with foods typically consumed on the the Mediterranean
Diet and will demonstrate recipes using these foods and will develop a one week menu featuring the Mediterranean Diet including nutritional analysis. Principles of the Mediterranean
Diet will be introduced via lecture and labs. A culminating experience will involve travel to
Dubrovnik, Croatia and the surrounding area to see and experience first-hand the principles
of the Mediterranean Diet. Lab fee as well as additional cost for study abroad component of
the course required. Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NUTR-215 
Contemporary Nutrition
This is an introductory course in contemporary nutrition issues. This course covers the study
of specific nutrients and their functions, the development of dietary standards and guides
and how these standards are applied throughout the lifecycle. Students learn to analyze their
own diets and develop strategies to make any necessary dietary changes for a lifetime of good
health. Current health and nutrition problems and nutrition misinformation will be discussed.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NUTR-223 
Food and Beverage Management Lab
This course will provide direct, practical experience for Nutrition Management students in
quantity foods development, production and service operations. Students will rotate through
several positions within the RIT food service department and become exposed to the many
activities that are required to run a large scale food operation. RIT’s foodservice department
will host Nutrition Management students for three hours each week as they are scheduled to
work through various rotations in the department. This lab is taken in conjunction with the
Food and Beverage Management course; FOOD-223. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to students in the NUTR-BS program.Co-requisite: FOOD-223 or equivalent course.) Lab 3,
Credits 1 (Spring)

	

NUTR-300 
Sports Nutrition
This course will provide an introduction to the integration between exercise and nutritionrelated topics by exploring the intimate link among nutrition, energy metabolism and human
exercise response. The course content will sort fact from fiction and help students and practitioners obtain the knowledge they need to give sound advice to athletes and active individuals.
(Prerequisite: College level science course preferred.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
NUTR-333 
Techniques of Dietetics Education
This course prepares Nutrition Management students to counsel and train clients and to give
effective and persuasive presentations. Topics include communications methods, learner/audience analysis, basic learning theory, developing counseling and training materials, as well as
designing, making, and evaluating individual and group presentations. As part of the course
each student is required to design and give a presentation and to design a self-training module/lesson. (Prerequisites: NUTR-125, MEDG-106, MEDS-250, MEDS-251 and CHMG-112 or
equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NUTR-402 
Dietetic Environment
Introductory supervised practice /practicum course. This course explores the profession of
dietetics which includes current dietetics practice as well as practice trends and career options.
Students interact with a representative sampling of personnel in all areas of food and nutrition. Students will become familiar with current Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Scope of
Practice Framework, Standards of Professional Performance, and the Code of Ethics in the profession of Dietetics. The development of an outcome based professional portfolio is required.
(Prerequisites: Restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing in NUTR-BS that have
completed NUTR-125, 2 co-ops (NUTR-499, 0619-499, 0620-499) and all required sciences
(CHMG-112, MEDS-250, MEDS-251, MEDG-106) or equivalent courses.) Lab 4, Lecture 2,
Credits 3 (Fall)
NUTR-497 
Dietetic Internship Seminar
Provides the student applying to Dietetic Internships a process to make the task manageable.
Students are provided timelines and assignments to step them through the application process
which includes a personal statement/letter of application, resume, letters of reference, portfolio, site visits and interviews. The Internship application process is accomplished through the
Dietetic Internship Centralized Application System (DICAS), and an independent centralized
computer matching organization, D&D Digital (DND). (Co-requisite: NUTR-525 or equivalent course.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
NUTR-499 
Co-operative Work Experience
Required career related experience. Employment within the food and health industry monitored by the Office of Cooperative Education and approved by the faculty in the Nutrition
Management program. Designed for the student to become exposed to career opportunities in
the industry and gain skills and contacts essential to securing a dietetic internship and becoming a Registered Dietitian. Three co-ops are required for graduation and students typically
complete them during the summer. Students must complete at least one co-op in a healthcare
environment and at least one co-op in the food industry. Freshmen begin co-op the summer
following their first year studies. Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
NUTR-510 
Nutrition in Complementary Medicine
This class offers students in the Nutrition Management major an overview of controversial
and accepted alternative diet therapies, basic medicine guidelines, and vitamin/mineral supplementation. (Prerequisites: Restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing in NUTR-BS
that have completed NUTR-125, 2 co-ops (NUTR-499, 0619-499, 0620-499) and all required
sciences (CHMG-112, MEDS-250, MEDS-251, MEDG-106) or equivalent courses.) Lecture
1, Credits 1 (Fall)
NUTR-525 
Medical Nutrition Therapy I
This course is the first course of a two course series. Review and application of biological
metabolism and interrelationships of nutrients, hormones, enzymes and other biochemical
substances in humans. Modification of nutritional intake to meet nutritional needs altered
by diseases and stress as well as use of alternate methods of feeding (enteral/parenteral) to
meet nutritional needs is discussed in depth. This course emphasizes the practical applications of medical nutritional therapy for use with patients/clients. (Prerequisites: This course
is restricted to 4th year students in NUTR-BS that have completed NUTR-125, NUTR-402, 2
co-ops (NUTR-499, 0619-499, 0620-499) and all required sciences (CHMG-112, MEDS-250,
MEDS-251, MEDG-106) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NUTR-526 
Medical Nutrition Therapy II
This course is a continuation of NUTR-525 Medical Nutrition Therapy I. Review and application of biological metabolism and interrelationships of nutrients, hormones, enzymes and
other biochemical substances in humans. Modification of nutritional intake to meet nutritional needs altered by diseases and stress as well as use of alternate methods of feeding (enteral/
parenteral) to meet nutritional needs is discussed in depth. This course emphasizes the practical applications of medical nutritional therapy for use with patients/clients. (Prerequisites:
NUTR-525 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

59

College of Health Sciences and Technology

NUTR-550 
Community Nutrition
Study of current nutrition issues and delivery of food and nutrition services in the community. The course is designed to allow senior level students to acquire skills necessary to deliver
services in the public health and private sector markets. Individual practicum in community
facility is required and arranged by the instructor. All students will also participate in industry
related research to identify innovative and effective delivery strategies for nutrition services
and will have the opportunity to accomplish peer dissemination of their previously completed
individual research project at an industry conference. (Prerequisites: NUTR-525 or equivalent
course.) Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
NUTR-554 
Life Cycle Nutrition
An applied course for the Nutrition Management major regarding the nutritional needs
throughout the life cycle. Emphasis is given to nutrition during pregnancy, infancy, early
childhood, adolescence, young and middle adulthood, and the elderly. Practicum in facilities
delivering nutrition services to these age groups is required. Practicum hours by arrangement. (Prerequisites: Restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing in NUTR-BS that
have completed NUTR-125, NUTR-402, 2 co-ops (NUTR-499, 0619-499, 0620-499) and all
required sciences (CHMG-112, MEDS-250, MEDS-251, MEDG-106) or equivalent courses.)
Lab 1, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)

Physician Assistant
PHYA-206 
Medical Microbiology
This course will introduce students to key elements and concepts of the biology of human
pathogens. Students will study how this understanding impacts the therapeutic modalities
for the treatment and prevention of human infectious disease. Through this learning process, students will gain an understanding as to how these topics directly relate to future roles
as healthcare providers. (This course is restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 2nd year
standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYA-401 
History and Physical Diagnosis I
This is the first in a two-course sequence which introduces and develops the clinical psychosocial skills and anatomic/physiologic science involved in interviewing and examining patients.
This course includes practical medical terminology, attitude development and values clarification strategies to aid students in adopting a humanistic approach, interviewing techniques
used during patient interaction, comprehensive database development, demonstrated techniques for complete physical examination of all body systems and explanation/implementation
of the Problem-Oriented Medical Record (POMR). The course involves weekly patient contact. (This course is restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 6,
Credits 4 (Fall)
PHYA-402 
History and Physical Diagnosis II
This second of a two-course sequence introduces and develops the clinical psychosocial and
anatomic/physiologic science involved in examining patients. The course includes performing and writing complete, accurate medical histories and physical examinations with small
group instruction. Weekly patient contact. (Prerequisites: PHYA-401 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Spring)
PHYA-405 
Pathophysiology I
This introductory course in the Pathophysiology of Disease course sequence will present the
physician assistant student with normal and abnormal function of cells in general, illustrating how these cellular abnormalities affect function of specific organ systems. The respiratory,
renal, and cardiovascular organ systems will be highlighted and mechanisms of neoplasia will be
introduced. The, endocrine, and gastrointestinal organ systems will be highlighted. (This course
is restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
PHYA-406 
Pathophysiology II
This second course is the second in a two-part sequence that introduces the physician assistant student to the normal and abnormal cellular and physiologic processes that underlie many
human diseases. Hematologic, pulmonary, immune, and neurologic systems will be covered
during this semester. Understanding of how these abnormalities affect clinical laboratory data
will also be acquired. (This course is restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
PHYA-409 
Clinical Lab Medicine
This course will investigate the appropriate use and interpretation of commonly utilized laboratory tests. Students will be asked to predict results that would be expected to occur in the
setting of various diseases. In addition, a significant component of this course will be to introduce the student to the principles of electrocardiogram (EKG) interpretation. By the end of the
course, students should be able to interpret both normal 12 lead EKGs as well as commonly
encountered abnormal EKGs, with an emphasis on ischemia and infarction. (This course is
restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 1, Credits 1 (Spring)

60	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHYA-415 
Pharmacology I
This introductory course in the Clinical Pharmacology course sequence presents the physician
assistant student with the necessary foundation of knowledge to safely and effectively prescribe
medication for common and/or important disorders. The course will begin with a study of the
mechanics of pharmacology: pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Following this introduction, an organ systems approach, paralleling the systems presented in Clinical Medicine I,
is utilized to study medications relevant to gastrointestinal disease. (This course is restricted
PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
PHYA-416 
Pharmacology II
This is the second course in the Clinical Pharmacology course sequence that presents the physician assistant student with the necessary foundation of knowledge to safely and effectively
prescribe medication for common and/or important disorders. Course content will complement
material presented simultaneously in the Clinical Medicine II course including key concepts of
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. These will be utilized to study medications relevant
to treat human diseases. (Prerequisites: PHYA-415 or equivalent course.PHYA-415 Prereq)
Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
PHYA-417 
Pharmacology III
This is the final course in the Clinical Pharmacology course sequence that presents the physician assistant student with the necessary foundation of knowledge to safely and effectively
prescribe medication for common and/or important disorders. Course content will complement
material presented simultaneously in the Clinical Medicine III course including key concepts
of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. These will be utilized to study medications relevant to treat diseases with a focus on the pediatric and geriatric populations. (Prerequisites:
PHYA-416 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
PHYA-419 
Advanced Gross Anatomy
This is a course designed as a laboratory-intensive overview of normal structure in prosected
(dissections performed ahead of time by staff) examples of cadaver anatomy. Special emphases will be placed on the anatomical correlates associated with upper/lower extremity, neck,
and back muscle groups/joints/bones, peripheral nerve plexuses (including spinal and cranial
nerves), major arterial/venous pathways, and body viscera in areas of the head/neck, thorax,
abdomen, and pelvis. Where appropriate, evidence of pathologies will be discussed at the
cadaver side. Additionally, students will participate in clinical case presentations that correspond to the particular dissection subject at-hand throughout the quarter. (This course is
restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
PHYA-420 
PA Seminar
This course provides physician assistant students with an introduction to the PA profession.
The course encompasses historical origins and early educational models. The course covers
various professional entities; licensure, certification, accreditation, professional organizations,
and medical ethics. (This course is restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
PHYA-421 
Diagnostic Imaging
This course introduces the PA student to the most clinically relevant diagnostic imaging modalities, emphasizing the risks and benefits of different modalities, as well as the appropriate
indications for obtaining a variety of radiographic studies. The student will be exposed to the
most common plain radiographic diagnoses likely to be encountered in clinical practice as
well as important life threatening diagnoses. At the conclusion of this course, the student will
have foundational skills and competency to interpret plain radiographs demonstrating these
important diagnoses. (This course is restricted to students in PHYA-BS with at least 4th year
standing.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
PHYA-422 
Clinical Medicine I
This is the first of the Clinical Medicine sequence of courses. The student will be presented with
the necessary foundation of knowledge to begin to understand the patient’s condition within
a clinical context. An organ systems approach is utilized in this course to study diseases of the
skin, ears, oral cavity, upper respiratory tract, endocrine system and gastrointestinal tract.
Principles of preventive medicine will be woven throughout the curriculum. An introduction
to disorders involving the cardiovascular system will complete the semester. (This course is
restricted PHYA-BS students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 10, Credits 5 (Fall)
PHYA-424 
Clinical Medicine III
This is the final course in the Clinical Medicine sequence of courses and is designed to complete
the introduction to human disease. The format will be primarily a population-based approach
to presenting disease. The unique diseases and developmental issues encountered in pediatrics,
geriatrics, and women’s health will be addressed. An introduction to the important medical
issues relevant to caring for surgical patients will be presented. Psychiatric illness, ophthamology, geriatrics, musculoskeletal and rheumatology will be presented. Special topics of trauma,
burns, and emergency medicine will complete the course. The principles of preventive medicine will continue to be integrated throughout the curriculum. (Prerequisites: PHYA-423 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 10, Credits 5 (Fall)

College of Health Sciences and Technology

PHYA-430 
Clinical Genetics
This course provides students with an introduction to medical genetics and relevant diseases,
syndromes, and clinical disorders. Course focuses on major disorders as subgroups and provides relevant overviews of associated diseases and syndromes within each subgroup. Course
also confronts current needs and comprehensive nature of genetic counseling, detailing various patient populations in which this is critical. (This course is restricted PHYA-BS students
with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
PHYA-440 
Society and Behavioral Medicine
This course is the introduction to professionalism, professional behaviors for the PA, and
behavior science for the PA student. We will explore stereotypes and providers’ inappropriate
(or lack of) knowledge and how this might influence access to care. The focus is non-somatic
medical skills and knowledge needed to become a clinician who manages these issues with
insight into human behavior. Topics will include issues related to age, socioeconomic status,
cultural, racial, religious, ethnic and family diversity etc. We will seek out and develop tools
to recognize facets (including risk factors for and signs/symptoms) of the above issues and of
abuse issues. Setting this foundation in basic psychopathology and its relationship to understanding human illness is core to the PA student’s developing professionalism. (This course is
restricted to students in PHYA-BS with at least 4th year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYA-510 
Hospital Practice
The student will begin working with hospitalized patients prior to their clinical year of rotations
in small group lead instruction. This course engages the student in the critical thinking process
used in the daily care and management of a patient. Student-generated patient cases (from
hospital work) will be utilized to work through the critical thinking process that is employed
in the day-to-day management of a patient. Enhancement of the development of differential
diagnosis, assessment and the treatment plans will be emphasized. Order writing, daily progress notes and clinical procedures for each case will be thoroughly explored. (This course is
restricted to students in PHYA-BS with at least 4th year standing.) Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall)
PHYA-520 
Clinical Integration
This course builds upon the foundation developed during the professional didactic phase of the
physician assistant program. Drawing upon this foundation, students will analyze simple and
complex case-based patient scenarios. Working individually and in groups, and using computer-assisted patient simulators when possible, the students will be asked to gather data from
physical examination, and EKG and laboratory data. Based on the data gathered, the student
will recommend further diagnostic evaluations, suggest appropriate treatment, and develop
follow-up plans based on the scenario presented. The development of thorough and relevant
differential diagnoses for each case study will be an integral part of this process. The case studies
will be drawn from a broad variety of clinical disciplines. In addition, students will be required
to work in small groups to develop their own "teaching case" and will lead the remainder of the
class through a learning exercise based on the case they have created. (This course is restricted to students in PHYA-BS with at least 4th year standing.) Lecture 8, Credits 4 (Spring)
PHYA-550 
Procedural Clinical Skills
This course provides the PA student with the requisite skills for professional courses and internships. Emphasis is on developing competence in basic skills in conjunction with patient care.
Current hepatitis B immunization status highly recommended. (This course is restricted to
students in PHYA-BS with at least 4th year standing.) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYA-560 
Healthcare Policy and Law
This course will provide an overview of health care law, principles and ethics as it relates to the
health care provider. Lecture topics will cover an introduction to law, criminal aspects of health
care, patient consent issues, legal reporting obligations, contracts and antitrust, information
management and health care records, HIPAA regulations, legal risk to the health care provider, patient safety and quality assurance, The Affordable Health Care Act, end of life issues, job
negotiations and malpractice insurance issues. (This course is restricted to students in PHYABS with at least 4th year standing.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

61

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences
Index
DDDD	 3D Digital Design.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 74
PHAP	 Advertising Photography .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 89
ARTH	 Art History .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67
PHBM	 Biomedical Photography.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 94
CCER	Ceramics.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 63
SOFA	 Film and Animation/Motion Picture Science.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 81
PHFA	 Fine Art Photography.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 91
FNAS	 Fine Arts Studio .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 70
FTDN	 Foundation Courses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 66
CWFD	 Furniture Design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .64
CGEN	 General Crafts Studies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 65
CGLS	Glass. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 65
GRDE	 Graphic Design.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 76
ILLS	Illustration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 71
IMSM	 Imaging Systems .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 94
IDDE	 Industrial Design .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 78
ITDI	 Interdisciplinary Imaging Arts.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 62
INDE	 Interior Design .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 79
MAAT	 Media Arts and Technology .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 86
ILLM	 Medical Illustration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 73
CMTJ	 Metals and Jewelry Design.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 65
NMDE	 New Media Design .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 80
PHVM	 Photo Visual Media .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 93
PHAR	 Photographic and Imaging Arts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 88
IMPT	 Photographic and Imaging Technologies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 93
PHPS	 Photographic Sciences. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 95
PHPJ	Photojournalism. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 92
CWTD	Textiles .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 66

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Interdisciplinary Imaging Arts
Interdisciplinary
ITDI-015 
Design in Dessau
This is a full-time, 12 unit course for matriculated RIT students wishing to take approved
courses at the Anhalt University of Applied Sciences in Dessau. Enrollment will give the students official status at RIT. and allow them to take courses at the host institution. These courses
will be chosen by agreement between an RIT. faculty advisor and a faculty sponsor in the host
school. Requests for participation must be initiated at least 6 months in advance to allow for
completion of institute and international paperwork. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) EQU 12, Credits 0 (Spring)
ITDI-101 
Honors Leadership
Designed to give students in the honors program out-of-classroom learning opportunities.
All students are required to keep a journal, attend pre-departure meetings, and present their
project at the end of the course. Each student will develop their own project in consultation
with the faculty member based on their academic field and the location of the course. (UGRDCIAS) Lecture, Credits 0 - 3 (Spring)

62	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ITDI-151H 
Explorations of Place and Space
This honors seminar is a foundational course that examines how our social worlds are linked
to our natural and built worlds. The corresponding emphasis on inquiry, analysis, and interpretation facilitates student-engaged learning. In exploring pertinent place and space related
issues/topics through an experiential, active, and site-specific curricular focused learning, various aspects of the human condition are discovered. The theme or topic of this honors seminar,
as chosen by the instructor, is announced in the subtitle as well as course notes and is developed
in the syllabus. The honors seminar integrates the required YearOne curriculum. (This class is
restricted to students in the Honors program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ITDI-211 
Drawing for Non-Majors
This class is devoted to developing basic skills in drawing. Formal art elements, mark making, observational skills, and personal expression will be stressed. Students will engage in
issues of representation and abstraction through relationships of marks, lines and other graphic notations. (This course is open to all undergraduate students except those in FNAS-BFA,
ILLM-BFA, ILLS-BFA, NMDE-BFA, GRDE-BFA, IDDE-BFA, INDE-BFA, 3DDG-BFA, CCERBFA, GLASS-BFA, METAL-BFA, WOOD-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA and PHTILL-BFA.) Studio 5,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-216 Calligraphy
This course will introduce students to a calligraphic hand for the purpose of acquiring a comprehensive understanding of letterform design and application for personal and professional
application. Students will learn to letter using traditional and current tools and techniques.
This course is open to anyone who is interested in learning more about lettering, the historical evolution of calligraphy as a precursor to typography and about past, present and emerging
styles and practitioners in the fields of lettering, calligraphy and typography. (This course is
available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-221 
2D Design for Non-Majors I
This course is a structured, cumulative introduction to the basic elements and principles of
two-dimensional design for students who are interested in art and design but are not art and
design majors. Organized to create a broad introductory experience, the course focuses on
the development of both a visual and a verbal vocabulary as a means of exploring, developing and understanding two-dimensional compositions. Concepts are introduced through
lectures, discussions, demonstrations, research, assigned projects and critiques. The course
addresses a wide variety of media, tools, techniques both traditional and technological, and
theoretical concepts to facilitate skill development and experimentation with process. Visual
comprehension, the ability to organize perceptions and horizontal thinking that crosses other disciplines and theories, are key foundational components to the development of problem
solving skills. Accumulative aspects of the curriculum included the exploration of historical
and cultural themes and concepts intertwined with aspects of personal interpretation and
experience. (This course is open to all undergraduate students except those in FNAS-BFA,
ILLM-BFA, ILLS-BFA, NMDE-BFA, GRDE-BFA, IDDE-BFA, INDE-BFA, 3DDG-BFA, CCERBFA, GLASS-BFA, METAL-BFA, WOOD-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA and PHTILL-BFA.) Studio 5,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-222 
2D Design for Non-Majors II
This course is the second-semester of a sequential, structured introduction to the basic elements and principles of two-dimensional design. Organized to create a broad introductory
experience, students will build upon the visual and a verbal vocabulary, media, techniques,
skill development and processes acquired in previous course work. This course will also focus
on the comprehensive exploration of color theory as well as dealing with conceptualization
and more advanced issues related to problem solving. Accumulative aspects of the curriculum included the exploration of historical and cultural themes and concepts intertwined
with aspects of personal interpretation and experience. (Prerequisite: ITDI-221 or equivalent
course and undergraduate student standing in any major except FNAS-BFA, ILLM-BFA, ILLSBFA, NMDE-BFA, GRDE-BFA, IDDE-BFA, INDE-BFA, 3DDG-BFA, CCER-BFA, GLASS-BFA,
METAL-BFA, WOOD-BFA and PHIMAG-BFA.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-223 
Garden Sculpture
This course is designed for students to create outdoor sculpture working with either natural
or weather-resistant materials. Lecture 2, Studio 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ITDI-226 
Creating Artist Books
This course focuses on preparing students with the tools needed to create an artist book.
Emphasis will be placed on the exploration of materials and ideas. The end product will be a
finished artist book. Creative expression and technical experimentation will be encouraged.
The course will culminate with the students publicly presenting their process and resulting
artwork. (This class is open to undergraduate students in CIAS except those with majors in
FNAS-BFA, ILLM-BFA or ILLS-BFA.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ITDI-231 
Introduction to Cartooning
This course is devoted to an intensive investigation into the language of cartooning as a narrative medium. Focus will be on the function of visual images (and then images in sequence) to
dispense information. Each week a new aspect of graphic storytelling will be discussed, allowing for more narrative and emotional range. Students will devote the last third of the course to
a project of their own. Students will draw and create dynamic stories through image making.
(UGRD-CIAS) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-233 
Typeface Design
Exploration of calligraphic letterforms, typographic history, and practical production with an
emphasis on developing concepts, nomenclatures and techniques involved in the design of a
digital typeface. An understanding of basic typography and calligraphy is needed. Course can
repeated for a second time with advanced coursework assigned. (This course is available to
Undergraduate College of Imaging Arts and Sciences students with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lab 2, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
ITDI-236 
Figure Drawing
Figure drawing skills are taught in a traditional life drawing class format with emphasis on
dynamic line quality, visual perception and contemporary approaches to figure drawing. (This
class is open to all undergraduate students except for those in the FNAS-BFA major.) Studio
5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-239 
Figure Painting
This class is structured to explore materials and techniques in order to paint the human form.
Theory and practice of color and drawing, as well as other resources, will be used to develop an
understanding of how to portray the figure. Traditional and contemporary approaches to figurative painting are utilized in producing figure paintings. (This class is open to undergraduate
students in CIAS except those with majors in FNAS-BFA.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-242 Painting
Students begin a personal exploration of techniques in painting to advance their understanding,
using color theory, building compositions and effective use of painting materials. Individual
approaches to content range from abstraction through representational art, as students address
contemporary visual arts issues. (This class is open to all undergraduate students except for
those in the FNAS-BFA major.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-246 
Painting and Collage
Students will be encouraged to experience and explore painting and collage processes and
methods in this studio-based course. A study of the history, methods and materials of painting and collage will be presented and explored. Students establish strategies toward solving
problems of composition, materiality and ideas related to successful imaging making. (UGRDCIAS) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-248 
Sketchbook Artists Designers
This course will facilitate the use of sketchbooks as an innovative visualization tool for artists and designers. Students will complete assignments by drawing, conducting research and
exploring onsite reference gathering. Exploration of subjects and environments support the
creation of visual reference material in the form of a sketchbook journal. Material documented
in the sketchbook will then provide visual reference for more complete artwork or design work.
(This class is open to undergraduate students in CIAS except those with majors in ILLS-BFA.)
Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-251 
Visual Storytelling for the Graphic Novel
This course is devoted to an intensive investigation into the graphic novel as a medium for
artistic practice. Designed for students interested in the art of storytelling through graphic
novels, the focus of this course will be for each student to create a mini-comic. Every phase of
production will be explored extensively: composing a story, developing a pace through layout
and composition, learning the fundamental tools of sequential illustration and then unifying
the entire structure into a self-published piece. A historical perspective of the medium will be
included. (UGRD-CIAS) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-256 
Web Design for Artists
This course is an introduction to the planning, design, and production of interactive art projects that are web based. Students will be introduced to web design concepts and principles in
site design, page design, graphical user interface design, and usability. The course will include
instruction in building pages and websites that support students in promoting their artwork
through web based representation and social media. Students will be encouraged to explore
highly structured as well as highly experimental approaches to merging content with the design
of interactive sites. The course will also incorporate social-cultural issues in digital art making.
(Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 or equivalent courses.) Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

ITDI-301 
Introduction to 3D Digital Creation
This course is an introduction to the creation of three-dimensional art and design in the digital
realm. The course focuses on the development of visual and verbal vocabulary as a means of
exploring, developing, and understanding composition and motion with digital geometry and in
virtual spaces in three-dimensional software. (UGRD-CIAS) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-311 
Advanced Drawing
Drawing is one of the most immediate and powerful forms of expression in the visual arts.
Because it is so adaptable, many have used drawing for their most dynamic explorations, from
installation art to underground comic books. Using both traditional and experimental drawing techniques, students will explore personal and contemporary drawing strategies. Students
will seek to develop meaningful personal imagery, while refining drawing skills along the way.
Experimentation with a wide range of media techniques and working methods including transfers, montages, collage, wash drawings and digital inputs students will also explore various ways
of gathering and integrating research materials, including photography. Development of your
own drawing series will be an intense culmination of the semester. We will look at how contemporary issues like digital technology, sampling, and photography have impacted how drawings
are made, how they are used and how they are understood in today’s art world. (Prerequisites:
FDTN-112 or equivalent course.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-316 
Digital Art and Mixed Media
This course offers students the opportunity to explore the creative potential of digital art
through the exploration of both traditional and digital media. Students will be expected to utilize
and combine skills learned in traditional and digital media to provide engaging and innovative
artworks. (Prerequisite: Student standing in an undergraduate major in CIAS and completion of FDTN-111 and FDTN-121 or equivalent courses.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ITDI-366 
Letterpress Design
This course will explore the art and technique of Letterpress Printing in the 21st Century.
Emphasis will be placed on typography and typesetting using lead and wood type. The history of
letterpress printing; its demise and rebirth in modern times, as well as wood block and linoleum
block printing will be covered. Hands-on methods of combining both types of design and hand
set typographic layouts in various mediums and sizes will be integrated. All aspects of the letterpress printing process will be covered: setting type correctly, tying forms, press make-ready
and maintenance, printing, ink mixing, paper, some book binding and finishing. We will also
explore digital design for letterpress printing using the Box Car Base. This course may be offered
off campus. This course may be repeated up to two times with advanced course work. **Fee:
There is a $75 lab fee to cover personal equipment and supplies** (This course is restricted to
undergraduate students in CIAS with at least 2nd year standing.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

School for American Crafts
Ceramics
CCER-201 
Ceramics Sophomore I
This course will introduce students to wheel throwing techniques as used in functional ware.
Emphasis will be placed on designing, preparation, and **Fee: There is a lab fee required for
this course** (CCER-BFA) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)
CCER-202 
Ceramics Sophomore II
This course will introduce students to hand building and mold making techniques as a foundation to create sculptural ceramic vessels. Emphasis will be placed on designing, preparation,
and execution of compositional elements in three-dimensional forms. Students will be encouraged to explore different methods and techniques to compete. **Fee: There is a lab fee required
for this course** (Prerequisites: CCER-201 or equivalent course and student standing in the
CCER-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Spring)
CCER-301 
Ceramics Junior I
During this semester, students will be introduced to industrial forming methods of ceramics.
Students will develop drawings / proposals and a strategy for production. The students will
then produce molds for slip casting as a means to produce multiples of a consistent quality.
Students will develop their own slip castings clay bodies, slips and glazes for cone 6-oxidations / reduction firings. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CCER-202 or equivalent course and student standing in the CCER-BFA program.CCER-202
& CCER-BFA) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

63

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

CCER-399 
Ceramics Part-time Coop
The ceramics co-op will provide students with the option to work in the ceramics field or ceramics industry. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the availability
of positions and business job needs. Ceramics co-ops must be approved and sponsored by a
faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

CWFD-202 
Furniture Design Sophomore II
This is the second of a two-semester sequential class covering the fundamental techniques
and aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the care and use of hand tools, the
care and maintenance of woodworking power tools, wood as a material, its basic properties, basic joinery and fundamental techniques of wood fabrication, and finishing. The course
includes a machine maintenance program. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course**
(Prerequisites: CWFD-201 or equivalent course and student standing in the WOOD-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Spring)

CCER-498 
Ceramics Undergraduate Internship
The Ceramics Internship will provide students with the option to work in the ceramics field.
Students may apply for internships to businesses based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Internship
Permission Form to enroll. Registration with co-op and placement office also required.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

CWFD-301 
Furniture Design Junior I
This is the first of a two-semester sequential class covering intermediate techniques and aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the design process, advanced hand and power tool
joinery, intermediate machine processes, chair design and construction and CAD/CAM/CNC
introduction. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites: CWFD-202 or
equivalent course and student standing in the WOOD-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)

CCER-499 
Ceramics Coop
The ceramics co-op will provide students with the option to work in the ceramics field or ceramics industry. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the availability
of positions and business job needs. Ceramics co-ops must be approved and sponsored by a
faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). Permission of department required. (Enrollment in this course requires permission
from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CCER-501 
Ceramics Senior I
The first semester of the senior year is a continuation of the work begun in the junior year.
The student’s proposal is to be defined and the work refined with discussion through faculty
and group critique. The criteria relating to the evolving concept will be developed with studio
involvement. Discussions relating to career choices, graduate and post graduate opportunities, job hunting, portfolio, resume writing, operating a studio, merchandising and business
practices will coincide with studio work.**Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course**
(Prerequisites: CCER-302 or equivalent course and student standing in the CCER-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)
CCER-502 
Ceramics Senior II
This is the second of a two-semester course in which seniors will produce a BFA project and
must be able to offer evidence of qualification as a candidate for the baccalaureate degree to
be approved by the faculty. The proposed body of work should develop self-expression and a
personal direction in clay. The work should express the goals and ideas as well as the materials
and processes that are stated in the proposal. Emphasis is on expression and technical foundation needed to establish the role of the body of work. The goal is to produce a coherent body of
work of high standard which must be exhibited at a venue at the end of the school year.**Fee:
There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites: CCER-501 or equivalent course and
student standing in the CCER-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Spring)
CCER-530 
Ceramics 3 Credit Elective
This is a class specifically designed for non-majors covering the fundamental techniques and
aesthetics of working with clay. Topics covered include the forming techniques, clay mixing,
basic properties of clay, glazing and firing techniques and fundamental understanding of historical and contemporary practices and applications. The course includes prescribed projects
based on the number of studio hours. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (UGRDCIAS) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CCER-599 
Ceramics Independent Study
Ceramics Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized
area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor will
propose a course of study. Ceramics students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission
from the department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

CWFD-302 
Furniture Design Junior II
This is the second of a two-semester sequential class covering intermediate techniques and aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the design process, advanced hand and power
tool joinery, intermediate machine processes, veneering, drawer, door and solid wood carcase
design and construction and CAD/CAM/CNC technology. **Fee: There is a lab fee required
for this course** (Prerequisites: CWFD-301 or equivalent course and student standing in the
WOOD-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Spring)
CWFD-399 
Furniture Design Part-time Coop
The furniture design co-op will provide students with the option to work in the furniture design
or furniture manufacturing fields. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses
based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Furniture design co-ops must be
approved and sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and
can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within
an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CWFD-498 
Furniture Design Internship
The Furniture Design Internship will provide students with the option to work in the furniture
design or furniture manufacturing field. Students may apply for internships to businesses based
on the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of an
instructor and complete the Internship Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
CWFD-499 
Furniture Design Co-op
The furniture design co-op will provide students with the option to work in the furniture design
or furniture manufacturing fields. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses
based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Furniture design co-ops must be
approved and sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and
can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within
an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
CWFD-501 
Furniture Design Senior I
This is the first of a two-semester sequential class covering advanced techniques and aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the design process, advanced woodworking
processes, conceptually driven design and construction, development of a capstone project proposal and CAD/CAM/CNC.**Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CWFD-302 or equivalent course and student standing in the WOOD-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Fall)

Furniture Design

CWFD-502 
Furniture Design Senior II
This is the second of a two-semester sequential class covering advanced techniques and aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the design process, advanced woodworking
processes, professional presentations, conceptually driven design and construction, and
the creation of a capstone body of work. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course**
(Prerequisites: CWFD-501 or equivalent course and student standing in the WOOD-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Spring)

CWFD-201 
Furniture Design Sophomore I
This is the first of a two-semester sequential class covering the fundamental techniques and
aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the care and use of hand tools, the care
and maintenance of woodworking power tools, wood as a material, its basic properties, basic
joinery and fundamental techniques of wood fabrication, and finishing. The course includes a
machine maintenance program. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (This course
is restricted to students in the WOOD-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)

CWFD-530 
Furniture Design 3 Credit Elective
This is a class designed for non-majors, covering a fundamental introduction to techniques
and aesthetics of woodworking. Topics covered include the use of select hand tools and woodworking power tools, wood as a material, its basic properties and fundamental processes of
wood fabrication. The course includes a prescribed project based on five in-class contact hours.
**Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (UGRD-CIAS) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)

64	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

CWFD-599 
Furniture Design Independent Study
Furniture Design Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study. Furniture Design students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Form to enroll. (This course requires permission of
the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

General Crafts Studies
CGEN-201 
Crafts Drawing Practice
This is the first of a two-semester class covering basic freehand sketching and measured drawing techniques for both design and presentation. Topics covered will include a broad range
of drawing types, architectural conventions and presentation strategies. The course includes
lectures, group discussions, independent study, homework, drawing and oral presentations.
Each semester long course is structured as an independent unit. (This course is restricted to
students in the CCER-BFA, GLASS-BFA, WOOD-BFA and METAL-BFA programs.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
CGEN-202 
Crafts CADD Drawing
This is the second of a two-semester class covering basic CADD (computer assisted design
and drawing) for both design and presentation. Topics covered will include a broad range of
drawing types, three-dimensional modeling and presentation strategies. The course includes
lectures, group discussions, independent study, homework, drawing and oral presentations.
Each semester long course is structured as an independent unit. (Prerequisites: CGEN-201 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CGEN-501 
Crafts Promotional Materials
This is the first of a two-semester class covering topics commonly associated with the operation of a small business in fields related to the fine and applied arts. This one semester course
addresses promotional issues including portfolio, photography, resume writing, business cards
and stationery, marketing, client relations, etc. Students will create their own comprehensive
promotional package. The course includes lectures, group discussions, independent study, studio and business visits, homework, papers, reports, and oral presentations. Each semester long
course is structured as an independent unit. (This course is restricted to 3rd year students in the
CCER-BFA, GLASS-BFA, METAL-BFA and WOOD-BFA programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CGEN-502 
Crafts Business Practice
This is the second of a two-semester class covering topics commonly associated with the operation of a small business in fields related to the fine and applied arts. This one semester course
addresses issues related to skills assessment, developing a sophisticated business plan, quantitative and qualitative business analysis, marketing, bookkeeping, legal issues and studio
operations, etc. The course includes lectures, group discussions, independent study, studio and
business visits, homework, papers, reports, and oral presentations. Each semester long course is
structured as an independent unit. (This course is restricted to 3rd year students in the CCERBFA, GLASS-BFA, METAL-BFA and WOOD-BFA programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Glass
CGLS-201 
Glass Sophomore I
This is the first of a two-semester sequential class covering fundamental glass working techniques and processes. Basic solid and blown techniques will be covered in the manipulation
of molten glass as well as an orientation to the processes of finishing or further manipulating
annealed glass in the cold shop. The course will also introduce the practice of utilizing traditional glass working techniques and processes in developing sculptural work based on ideas that
rely on the visual and behavioral properties of glass. Emphasis will be placed on traditional technique, craftsmanship, and problem solving. ** Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course**
(This course is restricted to students in the GLASS-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)
CGLS-301 
Glass Junior I
This is the first of a two-semester sequential class covering intermediate glass working techniques and processes. The course will build upon previous glass working knowledge and
introduce assignments that investigate new alternatives to complex, traditionally-based processes in the hot, cold, flame, and kiln shops. Projects are designed to build a stronger technical
palette. Additionally, projects will encourage students to research and integrate issues of personal interest and source material to inspire innovative pursuits and/or incorporations of
conventional techniques and processes. Emphasis will be on the process of ideation, experimentation, and exploration. ** Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CGLS-202 or equivalent course and student standing in the GLASS-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Fall)

	

CGLS-399 
Glass Part-time Coop
This course will examine professional opportunities present outside the major studio at RIT
or other studios or educational institutions. Students may apply for co-op employment to
businesses based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Glass Co-ops must be
approved and sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and
can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within
an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CGLS-498 
Glass Internship
Glass Internship is a course that offers students the chance to take advantage of professional
opportunities as they arise during their graduate studies. This course is structured on the basis
of the individual student’s needs, interests and background preparation as they may be determined through faculty counseling. This course leads to the master’s thesis, proposed by the
student and approved by the faculty. Registration with co-op and placement office is required.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT,
Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
CGLS-499 
Glass- Co-Op
This course will examine professional opportunities present outside the major studio at RIT
or other studios or educational institutions. Students may apply for co-op employment to
businesses based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Glass Co-ops must be
approved and sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and
can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within
an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
CGLS-501 
Glass Senior I
This is the first of a two-semester sequential class to aid the student in beginning the development of their thesis body of work. The student will articulate both a written and verbal
proposal for a cohesive body of work. Advanced techniques will be demonstrated with an
emphasis on acquiring skill and refinement of craftsmanship. Strong emphasis is placed on
studio practice, material sensibility, excellent craftsmanship and idea development. ** Fee:
There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites: CGLS-302 or equivalent course and
student standing in the GLASS-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Fall)
CGLS-502 
Glass Senior II
This is the second of a two-semester sequential class to aid the student in finalizing the development of their thesis body of work. The student will be guided by their written and verbal
proposal for a cohesive body of work. Advanced techniques will be demonstrated with an
emphasis on acquiring skill and refinement of craftsmanship within the context of their thesis exhibition. This course will prepare the student for professional exhibition opportunities
and to work well on self-directed goals as well as collaborate on shared goals through the
group senior exhibition. ** Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CGLS-501 or equivalent course and student standing in the GLASS-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Spring)
CGLS-530 
Glass 3 Credit Elective
This course will introduce the beginner to the glass studio and to glass as a creative material. ** Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (UGRD-CIAS) Studio 6, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
CGLS-599 
Independent Study-Glass
Glass undergrad independent study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study. Glass undergrad independent study students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Metals and Jewelry Design
CMTJ-201 
Metals and Jewelry Design Sophomore I
This course will introduce the student to basic jewelry hand tools. Ferrous and nonferrous
metals, their compositions and working priorities, will serve as the primary materials. This
course will provide an in depth instruction on basic design and fabrication techniques. Students
will obtain instruction on the proper use and maintenance of the metals shop, learn basic
machine and hand skills and basic tools. Students will be required to conduct research on a
historical metals topic, write a paper and give a presentation. **Fee: There is a lab fee required
for this course** (This course is restricted to students in the METAL-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

65

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

CMTJ-202 
Metals and Jewelry Design Sophomore II
This course will introduce the student to silver soldering and gem setting. Additionally, students will be introduced to basic forming skills for hollowware, flatware and jewelry. Ferrous
and nonferrous metals, their compositions and working priorities, will serve as the primary
materials. This course will provide an in depth instruction on design and fabrication techniques, the proper use and maintenance of the metals shop, as well as machine and hand
skills. Students will be required to conduct research on a historical metals topic, write a paper
and give a presentation.**Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CMTJ-201 or equivalent course and student standing in the METAL-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Spring)

CMTJ-501 
Metals and Jewelry Design Senior I
This course concentrates on hollowware design and production through the introduction of
spinning, advanced hollowware techniques and rendering. The design and compilation of
a professional resume is also completed. This course introduces advanced gem setting and
identification and gemstone anatomy. Students will obtain instruction on the proper use and
maintenance of the metals shop. Students will be taught advanced machine skills, hand skills
and tools. Students will be required to conduct research on a historical metals topic, write a
paper and give a presentation. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CMTJ-302 or equivalent course and student standing in the METAL-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Fall)

CMTJ-301 
Metals and Jewelry Design Junior I
This course will introduce the student to advanced jewelry techniques. Students will be
introduced to advanced properties of various metals as a material and advanced casting and
mold-making techniques. Students will study and learn the proper mathematical calculations
for casting and mold making. Learning how to calculate the proper proportional gravity weights
for alloys in casting will be taught. This course introduces jewelry and hollowware rendering,
chasing and repousse, and tool making, as well as provide in depth instruction on advanced
design and fabrication techniques. Students will obtain instruction on the proper use and
maintenance of the metals shop. Students will be taught advanced machine skills, hand skills
and tools. Students will be required to conduct research on a historical metals topic, write a
paper and give a presentation. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (Prerequisites:
CMTJ-202 or equivalent course and student standing in the METAL-BFA program.) Studio,
Credits 6 (Fall)

CMTJ-530 
Metals and Jewelry Design 3 Credit Elective
An elective course providing an opportunity for introductory study in metals: either hollowware or jewelry. Development of metals techniques, design fundamentals and encouragement
of personal expression will be encouraged. The student will learn to evaluate new techniques,
materials and concepts. Slide lectures, technical demonstrations, field trips, hands-on experience and critiques will be used. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course** (UGRD-CIAS)
Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

CMTJ-302 
Metals and Jewelry Design Junior II
This course will introduce the student to advanced jewelry techniques. This course continues
instruction in jewelry and hollowware rendering, chasing and repousse, and tool making. This
course introduces jewelry and hollowware design and production through the use of kumboo
(bi-metal) overlay technique and acid etching. This course will provide an in depth instruction on advanced design and fabrication techniques. Students will obtain instruction on the
proper use and maintenance of the metals shop. Students will be taught advanced machine
skills, hand skills and tools. Students will be required to conduct research on a historical metals
topic, write a paper and give a presentation. **Fee: There is a lab fee required for this course**
(Prerequisites: CMTJ-301 or equivalent course and student standing in the METAL-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 6 (Spring)
CMTJ-399 
Metals and Jewelry Design Part-time Coop
The metals and jewelry design undergraduate co-op will provide students with the option to
work in the metals and jewelry design industry. There is no academic credit awarded for this
course. Students may apply for coopemployment to businesses based on the availability of
positions and business job needs. Permission from the undergraduate program coordinator
required. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/
wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMTJ-498 
Metals and Jewelry Design Internship
The Metals and Jewelry Design undergraduate Co-op will provide students with the option
to work in the Metals and Jewelry Design Industry and get paid. There is no academic credit
awarded for this course. The opportunity must demand a minimum of 20 hours per week.
Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the availability of positions
and business job needs. Permission from the undergraduate Program Coordinator required.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT,
Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
CMTJ-499 
Metals and Jewelry Design Co-op
The metals and jewelry design undergraduate co-op will provide students with the option to
work in the metals and jewelry design industry. There is no academic credit awarded for this
course. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the availability of
positions and business job needs. Permission from the undergraduate program coordinator
required. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/
wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

66	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CMTJ-599 
Metals and Jewelry Design Independent Study
Metals and Jewelry Independent Swill provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study to pursue over the course of the semester. Goals and objectives
will be outlined by the student in conjunction with their faculty advisor. To enroll in a Metals
and Jewelry independent study students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. (This course requires permission of
the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Textiles
CWTD-530 
Quilting Elective
This course will introduce the beginner to the textile studio and to quilting as a creative process. This can be repeated to allow students to develop additional skills. **Fee: There is a lab
fee required for this course** (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate
students.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

School of Art
Foundation Courses
FDTN-111 
Drawing I
This course is an introduction to the visualization of form, thought and expression through the
drawing process. Concepts are introduced by lectures, discussions, demonstrations, research
and assigned projects. Designed to provide a broad introductory experience, students will
experiment with a wide variety of media, tools, techniques and subjects to develop drawing
expertise and problem solving skills related to design and composition. Course work will be
assessed through critique, facilitating self-assessment and the growth of both a visual and
verbal vocabulary. The focus of the course is to provide awareness of the full range of ways in
which drawing is used as a tool for both self-expression and communication. (UGRD-CIAS)
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FDTN-112 
Drawing II
This course is an introduction to the visualization of form, thought and expression through the
drawing process. Concepts are introduced by lectures, discussions, demonstrations, research
and assigned projects. Designed to provide a broad introductory experience, students will
experiment with a wide variety of media, tools, techniques and subjects to develop drawing
expertise and problem solving skills related to design and composition. Course work will be
assessed through critique, facilitating self-assessment and the growth of both a visual and verbal
vocabulary. The focus of the course is to provide awareness of the full range of ways in which
drawing is used as a tool for both self-expression and communication. (Prerequisites: FDTN111 or equivalent course.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

FDTN-121 
2D Design I
This course is a structured, cumulative introduction to the basic elements and principles of twodimensional design. Organized to create a broad introductory experience, the course focuses
on the development of both a visual and a verbal vocabulary as a means of exploring, developing and understanding two-dimensional compositions. Concepts are introduced through
lectures, discussions, demonstrations, research, assigned projects and critiques. The course
addresses a wide variety of media, tools, techniques both traditional and technological, and
theoretical concepts to facilitate skill development and experimentation with process. Visual
comprehension, the ability to organize perceptions and horizontal thinking that crosses other
disciplines and theories, are key foundational components to the development of problem solving skills. Accumulative aspects of the curriculum included the exploration of historical and
cultural themes and concepts intertwined with aspects of personal interpretation and experience. (UGRD-CIAS) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ARTH-136 
History of Wst Art:Renaissance to Modern
The subject of this year-long course is the history of western art and architecture from prehistory through the early 20th century. We will examine the form, style, function, and meaning
of important objects and monuments of the past, and consider these in their social, historical
and cultural contexts. A chronological study will allow us to recognize when, where and by
whom a given object was produced. Once these decisive factors are established, we may try to
determine why the object was made, what it meant in its time, place and culture, and whose
ideology it served. Since we are dealing with visual information, the primary goals of this class
are to learn how to look, and how to describe and analyze what we see. At the end of the academic year, students will be prepared to pursue more advanced courses in the discipline, for
they will have gained a foundational knowledge of the object, scope and methods of art history. The knowledge obtained in this introductory course will also guide students in their own
creative endeavors. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

FDTN-122 
2D Design II
This course is the second semester of a sequential, structured introduction to the basic elements and principles of two-dimensional design. Organized to create a broad introductory
experience, students will build upon the visual and a verbal vocabulary, media, techniques, skill
development and processes acquired during the fall semester. This term will also focus on the
comprehensive exploration of color theory as well as dealing with conceptualization and more
advanced issues related to problem solving. Accumulative aspects of the curriculum included
the exploration of historical and cultural themes and concepts intertwined with aspects of personal interpretation and experience. (Prerequisites: FDTN-121 or equivalent course.) Studio
6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ARTH-221 
Contemporary Design Issues: the Future of Design
Design History courses examine our past, Contemporary Design Issues examines our future
and will endeavor to explore key social, political, and economic events that influence and shape
the contemporary and future practice of design. The impact of green design, economic sustainability, universal design and design for all, professional ethics, corporatization, and globalism,
will be carefully examined. (UGRD-CIAS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

FDTN-131 
3D Design I
This course presents a progressive study over two-semesters in terminology, visual principles,
exploration, concept generation, process, and techniques of three-dimensional design. Using
hands-on problem solving, student will develop an informed understanding of the three-dimensional form and space with an emphasis on the elements and principles of visual design and
their function as the building blocks and guidelines for ordering a three-dimensional composition. A heightened awareness of form and space will be developed through lecture, assigned
projects, and critiques. Students will also develop a personal awareness of problem seeking
and solving, experimentation and critical analysis. **Note: May be taken as a one-semester
offering** (UGRD-CIAS) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FDTN-132 
3D Design II
This is the second-semester of a sequential course. The focus is on composing three-dimensional form and its relationship to space. Students will build on their prior term experiences, which
include the introduction to three-dimensional principles, materials, and building processes.
Students will develop the sophisticated skill of conceptualization. More advanced problems
will be assigned and students will have the opportunity to explore a wide range of material
and process possibilities for their resolution. A heightened awareness of idea development
and design research will be explored. Inclusion of 21st century themes in the arts of social
cultural and community. (Prerequisites: FDTN-131 or equivalent course.) Studio 6, Credits
3 (Spring, Summer)

Art History
ARTH-135 
History of Western Art:-Ancient to Medieval
The subject of this year-long course is the history of western art and architecture from prehistory through the early 20th century. We will examine the form, style, function, and meaning
of important objects and monuments of the past, and consider these in their social, historical
and cultural contexts. A chronological study will allow us to recognize when, where and by
whom a given object was produced. Once these decisive factors are established, we may try to
determine why the object was made, what it meant in its time, place and culture, and whose
ideology it served. Since we are dealing with visual information, the primary goals of this class
are to learn how to look, and how to describe and analyze what we see. At the end of the year,
students will be prepared to pursue more advanced courses in the discipline, for they will
have gained a foundational knowledge of the object, scope and methods of art history. The
knowledge obtained in this introductory course will also guide students in their own creative
endeavors. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

ARTH-311 
Art and Architecture of Italy: 1250-1400
The subject of this course is painting, sculpture and architecture of the second half of the
Dugento and the Trecento in Italy and its aim is to provide insight into the ways in which society and culture expressed its values through art;1250 marks the death of the last Hohenstaufen
Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II and 1401 is considered by many to mark the beginning of the
Early Renaissance, with the competition for the second set of bronze doors for the Baptistery of
Florence. Artist students will study will include Nicola and Giovanni Pisano, Arnolfo di Cambio,
Cimabue, Pietro Cavallini, Giotto, Duccio, Simone Martini, Pietro and Ambrogio Lorenzetti,
Tino da Camaino, Andrea Pisano, Orcagna, Andrea Bonaiuti, Giusto de’ Menabuoi, Altichiero,
and Paolo Veneziano. The works students will study will include altarpieces, private devotional
images, mural cycles, tombs, churches, chapels, town halls, palazzi and piazze. Questions for
consideration will include: the nature and meaning of this proto-Renaissance, the importance
of Antique and Medieval precedents, the increasing attention to the effects of nature, the role
of the patron, and the relevance of documents, literary sources and visual precedents for our
interpretation of images. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ARTH-312 
Art and Architecture of Italy: 1600-1750
This course focuses upon Italian artists working in Italy from circa 1600 to circa 1750 and its aim
is to provide insight into the ways in which society and culture expressed its values through art.
Students will explore painting, sculpture, and architecture, and more or less chronologically in
each major artistic center of Italy. Students will also have the opportunity to explore how these
different media coalesce to create an overwhelming visual experience. We will pay particular attention to major commissions given to Annibale Carracci, Michelangelo da Caravaggio,
Gianlorenzo Bernini, Alessandro Algardi, Francesco Borromini, Pietro da Cortona, Guarino
Guarini, Filippo Juvarra and Giambattista Tiepolo, as we seek to define the nature and meaning of the Italian Baroque and Rococo. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-317 
Art and Architecture in Florence and Rome: 15th Century
The subject of this course is 15th century painting, sculpture and architecture in Florence and
Rome and its aim is to provide insight into the ways in which society and culture expressed its
values through art; 1401 the year when the Calimala Guild announced a competition for a second set of bronze doors for the Baptistery of Florence and 1500 the year when Michelangelo
completed work on the Roman Pietà. Artists students will study include Filippo Brunelleschi,
Lorenzo Ghiberti, Donatello, Nanni di Banco, Luca della Robbia, Michelozzo, Leon Battista
Alberti, Lorenzo Monaco, Gentile da Fabriano, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, Fra Filippo Lippi,
Paolo Uccello, Bernardo and Antonio Rossellino, Andrea del Verrocchio, Antonio del
Pollaiuolo, Sandro Botticelli, Domenico del Ghirlandaio, Leonardo da Vinci, Filippino Lippi
and Michelangelo. The works students will study will include altarpieces, private devotional
images, portraits, mural cycles, paintings and sculpture of mythological subjects, allegories,
ceilings, doors, tombs, churches, chapels, palazzi, villas and piazze. Questions for consideration will include: the nature and meaning of the Early Renaissance, developments in artistic
theory and practice, the importance of Antique and Medieval precedents, the increasing attention to the effects of nature, the role of the patron, and the relevance of documents, literary
sources and visual precedents for our interpretation of images. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

67

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ARTH-318 
Art and Architecture in Florence and Rome: 16th Century
The subject of this course is 16th century painting, sculpture and architecture in Florence and
Rome and its aim is to provide insight into the ways in which society and culture expressed
its values through art; 1501 the year when Michelangelo returned from Rome to Florence to
begin carving the colossal marble David and 1600 marks the emergence of the Baroque style
in Rome. Artists students will study include Leonardo da Vinci, Bramante, Michelangelo,
Raphael, Sebastiano del Piombo, Jacopo Sansovino, Baccio Bandinelli, Jacopo Pontormo,
Agnolo Bronzino, Benvenuto Cellini, Bartolommeo Ammannati, Giorgio Vasari, and Giovanni
Bologna. The works students will study will include altarpieces, private devotional images, portraits, mural cycles, paintings and sculpture of mythological subjects, allegories, ceilings, tombs,
churches, chapels, palazzi, villas, piazze, fountains and equestrian monuments. Questions for
consideration will include: the nature and meaning of the High Renaissance, Mannerism, and
the late Renaissance, developments in artistic theory and practice, the importance of Antique
and Medieval precedents, the increasing attention to the effects of nature, the role of the patron,
and the relevance of documents, literary sources and visual precedents for our interpretation
of images. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ARTH-345 
History of Architecture, Interiors and Furniture I
This is a survey course on the history of western architecture, interiors, and furniture. During
the winter quarter, this course will provide the student with an overview of the components of
style, construction, and material as represented by architecture and home furnishings from
the late 17th century through the nineteenth century. We are also concerned with the social
context of architecture and home furnishings. Since this is an enormous undertaking, the material for study will necessarily be selective. The course will focus on the relationships between
the three disciplines and their cultural, technological, and historical development. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
ARTH-346 
History of Architecture, Interiors and Furniture II
This is a survey course on the history of western architecture, interiors, and furniture. During
the winter quarter, this course will provide the student with an overview of the components of
style, construction, and material as represented by architecture and home furnishings from
the late 19th century through the twentieth century. We are also concerned with the social
context of architecture and home furnishings. Since this is an enormous undertaking, the material for study will necessarily be selective. The course will focus on the relationships between
the three disciplines and their cultural, technological, and historical development. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-364 
Art in Paris
Students will study the history of artistic production and display in Paris, a city long regarded as
a capital of the art world, from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century. The class will explore
issues related to artistic production and display in Paris, including Paris as a center for Gothic
production, art and the royal court, the intersection of classicism and French art, art and revolution, art and public space, Paris as a center of modernity, the role of historic conservation,
and the role of museums. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-366 
18th, 19th Century Art
This course will examine Western art in the period leading up to the French Revolution and
the early Modern period-generally, the mid-19th century. This process will include a close
examination of the works and careers of individual artists who are considered some of the
best-known representatives of the most significant art movements of the era, such as rococo,
neoclassicism, romanticism, realism, and impressionism. Students will learn a new vocabulary
for discussing visual representations and attempt to situate issues within political, religious,
literary, and historical contexts. Throughout the course, a series of questions about art will be
presented and students will assess how the nature of those questions affects the way they see
images. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ARTH-368 
20th Century Art: 1900-1950
A critical study of the art and visual culture of the first five decades of the twentieth century.
Major stylistic movements in Europe and America will be examined with special attention to
innovations in materials, subject matter, and philosophy. Central themes include: the relationship between art and politics, abstraction vs. figuration, primitivism, anti-modernism, and the
search for origins, reactions to modernity and the rise of technology, the tension between the
avant-garde and popular culture, utopian and dystopian views of art and society, the institutional critique, artistic responses to Phenomenology, Existentialism, Nihilism, and the special role
of art and artists in modern society. Part I of a two-semester historical sequence devoted to 20th
century art. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

68	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ARTH-369 
20th Century Art: Since 1950
A critical study of the art and visual culture of the second half of the twentieth century.
Major stylistic movements in Europe and America will be examined with special attention
to innovations in materials, subject matter, and philosophy. Central themes include: Abstract
Expressionism, Pop Art, West Coast Junk, Funk and Beat, Nouveau Réalisme, CoBRA and
Situationism, Arte Povera, Earthworks, Site Specificity, Allegory, Conceptualism, Minimalism,
Feminism, Performance, Happenings, Installation, and New Media. Part II of a two-semester historical sequence devoted to 20th century art. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-373 
Art of the Last Decade
A critical study of the art and visual culture of the last decade with a strong emphasis on the
current American and international scene. The primary focus will be on living artists and artists who remain crucial to contemporary debates with special attention paid to recent, current,
and forthcoming exhibitions, their methodological frameworks, and historical context, as
well as the key critics, theorists and curators who are shaping the visual culture of the present.
(Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-378 
Baroque Painting in Flanders
Students will study the history of Baroque painting in Flanders from the mid 1500s to 1700
with specific focus on women, gender and illness, and the birth of Early Modern Europe. We
will consider the meaning of the Flemish Baroque, the observation and recording of natural
appearances (still-life paintings), “hidden symbolism” and sacramental themes and connections
between Flemish and Italian art. Peter Paul Rubens and Anthony Van Dyck are among the major
artists to be studied in addition to those who are lesser known. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-379 
Renaissance Painting in Flanders
The history of Renaissance painting in the Southern Netherlands from the beginning of the
15th century to the end of the 16th century with specific focus on women, gender, and illness
and the birth of Early Modern Europe. We will consider the meaning of the Renaissance in
Flanders, the observation and recording of natural appearances, “hidden symbolism” and sacramental themes in Early Netherlandish painting, the connections between Flemish, German,
and Italian art, the development of new genres in the 16th century, “originality” and artistic
progress. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-392 
Theory and Criticism of 20th Century Art
A critical study of some of the major theoretical and philosophical texts that ground twentieth century art as well as their impact on artists and art historians/critics. Taken together they
constitute what is presently called critical theory across a wide range of the humanities and
social sciences, as well as the emergence of an alleged postmodernism. Major issues include:
the theory of autonomy and self-reflexivity, the structuralist paradigm, post-structuralist and
Marxist critiques of modernism, feminist approaches to spectacle, semiotics, and the theory
of the sign, spectatorship, and commodity fetishism, the relation of vision to constructions of
identity and power. Key authors to be discussed include: Lessing, Kant, Greenberg, Foucault,
Barthes, Benjamin, Saussure, Pierce, Levi-Strauss, Lacan, Lyotard, Bataille, Debord Baudrillard,
and Ranci. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-457 
Art and Activism
This course will focus on artists using their work for the purpose of changing society. Students
will consider work by both individual artists and artists working in groups that cause critics,
art historians, other artists and the viewing public to ask if what they are doing is art. Although
there will be forays back to the 19th and early 20th centuries, most time will be dedicated to
artists of the last three decades. We will examine texts that propose art to be a form of activism
and persuade artists to be responsible for the way they represent the world - and maybe even
determine if the goal of art is not to represent it in the first place. What is Art? What should
Art be? What should Art do? But is It Art? are just some of the questions that are asked when
art comes into contact with the political - especially when that art proposes to make a political or social change - i.e., when art becomes action. Although these questions may not seem
immediately answerable, it is our responsibility to ask them and then attempt to answer them
as best we can. The artists and theorists that we will discuss are concerned with problems in
our society that effect gender, race, sexuality, poverty, labor issues, and the environment. Most
of these theorists and artists can be classified as angry and confrontational or at least evoking a form of contestation and, therefore, their art and ideas are reflective of these positions.
(Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-521 
The Image
The image remains a ubiquitous, controversial, ambiguous and deeply problematic issue in contemporary critical discourse. This course will examine recent scholarship devoted to the image
and the ideological implications of the image in contemporary culture. Topics will include:
the modern debate over word vs. image, the mythic origins of images, subversive, traumatic,
monstrous, banned and destroyed images (idolatry and iconoclasm), the votive and effigy,
the mental image, the limits of visuality, the moving and projected image, the virtual image,
image fetishism, the valence of the image, semiotics and the image, as well as criteria by which
to assess their success or failure (their intelligibility) and their alleged redemptive and poetic
power. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ARTH-541 
Art and Architecture of Ancient Rome
In this course, students will examine the visual culture of ancient Roman civilization from the
foundations of Roman culture through the Late Imperial era. Roman culture was heavily reliant
on images as a means of transmitting concepts of lineage, status, and power; students will learn
how these images may have been perceived in the context of Roman social and political history, and how style may have been used as an ideological tool. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-544 
Illuminated Manuscripts
Students in this course will examine the history of illuminated manuscripts, learning about the
working methods of artists as well as the cultural significance of the illuminated book. Issues
of production, style, function, and patronage will be introduced, and students will explore the
relationships between images, texts, and readers. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-550 
Topics in Art History
A focused, critical examination and analysis of a selected topic in Art History varying according to faculty teaching the course. A subtopic course description will be published each term
course is offered. This course can be repeated. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-554 
Late Medieval Art
This course will examine architecture, sculpture, painting, and decorative arts in Europe from
the mid-twelfth century to the Renaissance. Students will analyze the visual culture of the
period in relation to the historical, social, and political contexts of its production. Primary
issues to be considered include the concept of Gothic, architectural design and construction,
the format, function, and creation of manuscripts, art and religious practice, the status and
organization of artists, artistic patronage, regional styles, and cross-media influences. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-561 
Latin American Art
This is a survey course of the historical development of the art of Latin America from colonial times to the present. Included will be a consideration of painting, sculpture, architecture,
graphic, and photographic arts. Potential themes to be addressed include the dependence on
the European neo-classical academic model; indigenism; nationalism and the resurgence of
"popular" art; the role of the visual arts in the construction of history; the conflicts and tensions
involved in the search for a cultural identity. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-566 
Early Medieval Art
This class will examine medieval European artistic production - including architecture, architectural and free standing sculpture, metalwork, painting, and manuscript illumination - from
the sixth to the twelfth centuries. The visual culture of the period will be analyzed in relation
to the historical, social, and political context of its production. Primary issues to be considered
include architectural structure, art and religious practice, the status and organization of artists and builders, art as an expression or enforcer of identity, the question of regional styles,
contact with other cultures, and the relationship between medieval art and the past. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-571 
Extreme Abstraction
This course examines the historical foundation, critical debate, and ideological motivations
regarding abstraction in the modern era. It also explores some of the key theorists of abstraction (Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Clement Greenberg, Stan Brakhage, and B.H.D. Buchloh),
as well as the critical grounds for the shift toward the nonfigurative. Relevant historical movements that will be studied include Abstract Expressionism, Suprematism, De Stijl, Cubism,
the Monochrome, Photographic and Filmic Abstraction, and the limits of representation. Key
artists to be considered include: Man Ray, Charles Biederman, Gerhard Richter, Chuck Close,
Ellsworth Kelly, Robert Ryman, Agnes Martin, Robert Mangold, Bridget Riley, Tony Conrad,
Stan Brakhage and Harry Smith. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 & ARTH-368 or ARTH-369 or
equivalent.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-572 
Art of the Americas
This is a survey course of Native North and South American visual arts within an historical and
anthropological framework. Included will be an examination of the development of principal
styles of Ancient American architecture, sculpture, painting, and ceramics up to the sixteenth
century when the Spanish conquistadors defeated the Aztec and Inca empires and imposed
colonial rule. Consideration is also given to materials used, techniques of construction, individual and tribal styles, as well as to the meaning and function of various art forms within
Native American societies. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ARTH-573 
Conceptual Art
This course examines the widely influential mid-1960s art movement that questioned the fundamental nature of art itself by renunciating the material art object as well as the phenomenon
of art making. The definition of art as well as its institutional framework was thereby expanded,
and the idea, concept, or intellectual dimension of the work was underscored. Students will be
acquainted with the philosophical foundations and critical implications of this global movement across a wide spectrum of works and practices (paintings, performance, installations,
books and texts, photography, film, and video) and its relevance to contemporary concerns.
(Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

ARTH-574 
Dada and Surrealism
This course examines the widely influential Dada and Surrealist movements in Europe and
the United States from 1916 through the post-World War II period as well as their relevance
to contemporary concerns. Emphasis is on identifying the major works of artists involved in
these movements as well as their philosophical foundations, critical implications, as well as
broader literary and ideological contexts (e.g. Freud, Breton, Lautréamont, Leiris and Bataille).
A wide range of works and practices (paintings, performance, installations, literary texts, photography, film, and ephemeral objects) will be studied, and the work of certain key artists
(Höch, Heartfield, Schwitters, Duchamp, Picabia, Dalí, Ernst, Giacometti, Man Ray, Bellmer,
Cahun, Cornell, Magritte, Miro, Oppenheim, Toyen and Picasso) will be analyzed in depth.
(Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-577 
Displaying Gender
This course brings together two of the most significant strains of recent art historical scholarship: the study of gender in representation and the critical examination of exhibitions and
museums with particular focus given to key examples of curatorial practice from the late 19th
century to the present day. Through readings, possible museum visit(s), class discussions, and
guided individual research, questions of gender in exhibitions will be considered in relation
to other aspects of identity including sexuality, race, and class. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ARTH-578 
Edvard Munch
The Norwegian artist Edvard Munch (1863-1944) continues to generate a great deal of popular
interest, critical scholarship, and reflection. The 4-volume catalogue raisonn of his paintings
was published in 2009, and the graphic work appeared in 2001. A painter, printmaker, photographer, and filmmaker, Munch was also a prolific writer, well acquainted with the symbolist
poets and playwrights, as well as the broad intellectual drift of the fin-de-Sicle. He is the one
Scandinavian artist included within the Modernist canon and his image, The Scream (1893),
is an icon of the modern age. Munch traveled widely throughout Europe and his work was
exhibited in North America beginning with the famous 1913 Armory Show. This course will
examine recent scholarship devoted to Munch and the critical issues that his work addresses.
It will also place him within the broader cultural context of Scandinavian and European modernism, while examining his impact on subsequent generations. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-582 
Medieval Craft
In this course, we will explore the history of craft production throughout the Middle Ages. While
modern scholars have often divided art from craft, this distinction did not exist in medieval
Europe: artists were craftspeople, producing objects that were both practically and symbolically
functional. This class will focus on the decorative arts including stained glass, ivories, textiles,
and metalwork to produce a more integrated picture of medieval visual culture. Students will
study both practical aspects of production and the reception and meaning of these objects
within medieval society. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-583 
Installation Art
This course will introduce students to historic, contemporary, and critical issues surrounding
installation art. There will be an introduction to the development of installation art as a genre.
We will examine the changes, which have developed over the past three decades, of object
sculpture to non-object. There will be an emphasis on the development of the concept of an
installation project and its relationship to site and/or audience. Both public and gallery spaces
will be discussed. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ARTH-584 
Scandinavian Modernism
This course examines the decorative arts and visual culture of modern Scandinavia from 1860
to the present, with special emphasis on the social, economic, and political impulses that have
shaped them. Scandinavian Modern design plays a significant role in the postwar epoch; it is
equated with such leading brands as Volvo, Saab, Ericsson, Nokia, H&M, Electrolux Orrefors,
Georg Jensen, ARTEK, Iitala, and IKEA and the idea of progressive, social democracy. The
myths and realities of its success will be examined and related to emerging cultural and national
identities, as well as its impact on contemporary design. (Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-586 
History of Things: Studies in Material Culture
This course is an examination of techniques and materials together with a historical overview
of the artistic achievements of craftsmen and women in the past, with particular emphasis
on ceramics and metalsmithing. It includes study of Renaissance and early modern earthenware and stoneware as a prelude to the consideration of the history of porcelain and explores
creative thinking and designing in other traditional craft areas such as fiber, glass, and wood.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

69

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ARTH-587 
The Gothic Cathedral
This class will examine the Gothic cathedral and related art production (stained glass, sculpture,
and metalwork within the cathedral context) from the twelfth through the fifteenth century.
Students will study cathedrals of the late middle ages within their cultural contexts and examine the meanings such buildings conveyed to their intended audiences. The class will explore
the design, structure, and construction of Gothic cathedrals throughout Europe, and will also
examine the decorative programs of sculpture, stained glass, and liturgical objects integral to
the meaning and function of these structures. Issues to be considered include the production
of cathedrals; the stylistic variations of Gothic; the relationship between function and form;
the urban context of Gothic cathedrals; and the holistic view of the Gothic cathedral. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ARTH-588 
Symbols and Symbol Making: Psychoanalytic Perspectives on Art
This course explores the links between psychoanalytic theory, art history and visual culture
with special focus on the work of Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, and their followers. A central aim
is to examine the way in which psychoanalytic theory has been employed by art historians and
theorists as a mode of interpretation, as well as to study how, why, and what several of the most
notable psychoanalysts have written about art. Topics include the interpretation of dreams,
transference, the Oedipal myth, melancholia, narcissism, abjection, the structure of the unconscious, the fetish, Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, as well as outsider art, and the
art of the insane. Key theorists to be discussed include: Freud, Jung, D.W. Winnicott, Melanie
Klein, Jacques Lacan, Otto Rank and Julia Kristeva; individual artists studied include: Albrecht
Drer, Leonardo da Vinci, Edvard Munch, Lars Hertervig, Max Ernst, Jackson Pollock, Antonin
Artaud, Louise Bourgeois, Mary Kelly and Victor Burgin; in addition to examples from film
(Maya Deren, Luis Bu uel and Salvador Dali, and Stan Brakeage). (Prerequisites: ARTH-136
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Fine Arts Studio
FNAS-201 
Introduction to New Forms
As one of five required sophomore courses that introduce the techniques, processes, and technologies of the visual fine arts to Fine Arts Studio students, introduction to new forms focuses
on the diverse new forms of expression that have emerged in contemporary fine art including: installation, performance, video, light, sound, and numerous digital media. Students
will research and produce artwork utilizing some of these new forms of personal expression.
(Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 or equivalent courses and enrollment
in the FNAS-BFA program.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-202 
Intro Non-Toxic Printmaking
This course is designed to introduce non-toxic printmaking concepts and techniques.
(Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 or equivalent courses and enrollment in the FNAS-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-203 
Introduction to Painting
Students begin a personal exploration of techniques in painting to advance their understanding,
using color theory, building compositions and effective use of painting materials. Individual
approaches to content range from abstraction through representational art, as students address
contemporary visual arts issues. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 or
equivalent courses and enrollment in the FNAS-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-204 
Introduction to Sculpture
This course is designed for students to develop ideas through investigation of basic sculpture
practices, processes, and materials. Introduction to additive, subtractive, assemblage, and substitution processes of making sculpture will be covered with expectations that students will
develop these skills in relation to individual concepts and directions. (Prerequisites: FDTN112 and FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 or equivalent courses and enrollment in the FNAS-BFA
program.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNAS-269 
Sculpture for Non-Majors
This course offers an introduction to sculpture and will expose students to basic concepts,
forms, methods, and materials of the art form. The principles of space, volume, surface texture, multiple viewpoints, and gravity will be explored in three-dimensional projects. (This
course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
FNAS-305 
Figure Drawing
Figure drawing skills are taught in a traditional life drawing class format with emphasis on
dynamic line quality, visual perception and contemporary approaches to figure drawing.
(Prerequisites: FDTN-112 or equivalent course and FNAS-BFA Major students.) Studio 6,
Credits 3 (Fall)

70	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

FNAS-399 
Fine Arts Studio Part-time Coop
The fine arts studio co-op will provide students with the option to work with established artists
or in fine art related businesses. Students may apply for co-ops with businesses based on the
availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of a faculty
member to enroll. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FNAS-401 
Senior Show
This course gives Fine Arts Studio students a capstone experience focused on the exhibition
of a culminating body of artwork. Professional presentation through oral, written, and visual
means as relevant to the contemporary art world will be stressed. Students will be involved in
every aspect of their senior show from creating the work, hanging the exhibition, and preparing marketing materials. (Prerequisites: FNAS-514 or equivalent course and 4th year standing
in FNAS-BFA.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-405 
Fine Art Drawing
This class is devoted to building upon each student’s skills in drawing with attention to use
of a variety of mark making materials and surfaces. Drawing uses perceptual and conceptual approaches to creative visual art making. Students engage in issues of representation and
abstraction through relationships of marks, lines and other graphic notations. Contemporary
drawing can focus on direct observations or imaginative compositions among many other
valid approaches. (Prerequisites: FNAS-305 or equivalent course and FNAS-BFA Major students.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNAS-498 
Fine Arts Studio Internship
The Fine Arts Studio Internship will provide students with the option to work with established
artists or in fine art related businesses. Students may apply for internships to businesses based
on the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of an
instructor and complete the Internship Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-499 
Fine Arts Studio Co-op
The fine arts studio co-op will provide students with the option to work with established artists
or in fine art related businesses. Students may apply for co-ops with businesses based on the
availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of a faculty
member to enroll. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-501 
Fine Arts Studio: New Forms
New Forms examines the diverse new forms of expression that have emerged in contemporary
fine art, including installation, performance, video and digital art among the many other possibilities. Students will research some of these new forms and produce artwork in at least one
of these forms. Students in the Fine Arts Studio program may choose any combination of Fine
Arts Studio: (Painting, Non-Toxic Printmaking, Sculpture or New Forms) classes to meet the 18
credit course requirements in their major. Any course may be repeated.. (This course is restricted to students in FNAS-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-502 
Fine Arts Studio: Non-Toxic Printmaking
This course is designed to introduce advanced non-toxic printmaking concepts and techniques.
The focus will be on non-toxic intaglio printmaking research and how to creatively apply techniques that will result in sophisticated works of art. Students in the Fine Arts Studio program
may choose any combination of Fine Arts Studio: (Painting, Non-Toxic Printmaking, Sculpture
or New Forms) to meet the 18 credit course requirements in their major. Any course may be
repeated. (This course is restricted to students in FNAS-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.)
Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-503 
Fine Arts Studio Painting
Fine Arts Studio Painting students engage in contemporary visual art practice through a personal exploration of painting techniques. Individual approaches to painting address issues of
representation and abstraction to build a portfolio for further career advancement. Students
in the Fine Arts Studio program may choose any combination of Fine Arts Studio: ( Painting,
Non-Toxic Printmaking, Sculpture or New Forms) classes to meet the 18 credit course requirements in their major. Any course may be repeated. (This course is restricted to students in
FNAS-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

FNAS-504 
Fine Arts Studio: Sculpture
This course allows students to explore concepts, materials, processes, and techniques to develop
a personal, cohesive three-dimensional body of work. Theories and history of sculpture will be
discussed as relevant to individual directions. Students in the Fine Arts Studio program may
choose any combination of Fine Arts Studio: (Painting, Non-Toxic Printmaking, Sculpture
or New Forms) to meet the 18 credit course requirements in their major. Any course may be
repeated. (This course is restricted to students in FNAS-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.)
Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-514 
Ideation and Series
Creative flow, having an endless stream of ideas, alternatives, and choices for solutions, helps
creative work evolve and reach more advanced levels. In this course students develop appropriate skills and strategies to generate ideas and develop them effectively. (This course is restricted
to students in FNAS-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNAS-531 
Non-Toxic Printmkg Non-Majors
This course is designed to introduce non-toxic printmaking concepts and techniques to students outside the Fine Arts Studio major. (This course is restricted to students with majors
in CIAS who have at least 3rd year standing. Students in FNAS-BFA are not permitted to take
this course.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNAS-533 
Painting for Non-Majors
Students will be encouraged to experience and explore the properties of Oil Painting and establish strategies toward solving problems of composition related to successful form content.
(This class is restricted to undergraduate students in CIAS however, students in the FNASBFA program are prohibited from enrolling in this class.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-535 
Art Gallery Management
The complex social and cultural role of a fine arts gallery will be explored through supportive gallery operations: the installation of experimental and traditional exhibits, promotion,
and marketing for competitions, student initiatives and special events tailored to the RIT and
community arts audiences, Metro site visitations and gallery research will be combined with
arranged studio hours in a gallery laboratory setting. (This course is available to RIT degreeseeking undergraduate students.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-538 
New Forms for Non-Majors
New Forms for Non-Majors is designed to introduce students who are not in the Fine Arts
Studio program to some of the new possibilities for personal expression outside of or beyond
traditional drawing, painting, printmaking and sculpture. The students’ expertise from other
fields can be channeled into forms of personal, fine art expression. (This course is restricted
to students with majors in CIAS who have at least 3rd year standing. Students in FNAS-BFA
are not permitted to take this course.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-543 
Foundry Practices
This course is designed to introduce or develop students’ skills in casting metals with an emphasis on cast iron and the use of a cupola. Advanced pattern-making, mold-making, sprueing,
patination, and casting techniques will be introduced. Students will develop their concepts
through cast metal sculpture. Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-550 
Topics in Fine Arts Studio
A focused immersion into a selected traditional or contemporary process, technique, medium
or material used in the creation of artwork. Topic will be determined by faculty teaching the
course. A subtopic course description will be published each term the course is offered. This
course can be repeated. (UGRD-CIAS) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNAS-560 Watercolor
An intermediate to advanced exploration of watercolor concepts and techniques to enhance
skill development and personal expression of the individual student. Lecture/Lab 5, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FNAS-561 
Digital Art Printmaking
Undergraduate students may elect to take this course for greater practice and experience with
popular software and digital tools to create fine art prints. Students will become more knowledgeable about printmaking processes, and using concepts employing digital design and
production of unique prints on paper. Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNAS-563 
Contemporary Drawing
Students experiment and explore drawing as an expressive end, in and of itself. Individual
approaches to content range from abstraction through representational art, as students address
contemporary visual art issues through drawing. Participation in classroom exercises along
with the development of individual work is expected. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 or equivalent
course.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

FNAS-568 
Monoprint Figure
Introduction and continuation of life drawing exercises focusing on dynamic and expressive
line quality. Half of the class time schedule will be dedicated to life drawing and the other half
to mono-printing. The focus will be on applying figure drawing skills to mono-printmaking
and how to creatively apply techniques that will result in works of art. (Prerequisites: FDTN112 and FDTN-122 or equivalent courses.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-571 
Painting the Figure
This class is structured to explore materials and techniques in order to paint the human form.
Theory and practice of color and drawing, as well as other resources, will be used to develop
an understanding of how to portray the figure. Traditional and contemporary approaches to
figurative painting are utilized in producing figure paintings. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and
FDTN-122 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNAS-573 
Figure Sculpture
Through the use of live models the student will develop an understanding of the human form
through the creation of multiple armatures and oil clay maquettes. The student will then create a casting pulled from the accumulated experience with the model. (UGRAD-CIAS YR 3-4)
Lecture 2, Studio 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-583 
Welding and Fabrication
This course is designed to introduce or develop students’ skills in metal fabrication. Several different types of equipment will be introduced and explained along with the welding and cutting
processes. Emphasis will be placed on students completing body of work consisting of finished
fabricated steel sculptures. The course will be taught off-campus at Rochester Arc and Flame
Center. **Fee: There is a $200 lab fee to cover personal equipment and supplies** (Prerequisites:
FDTN-132 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 8, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNAS-599 
Fine Arts Studio Independent Study
Fine Arts Studio Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study. Fine Arts Studio Independent Study students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Illustration
ILLS-213 
Illustration I
Illustration I is the primary core course for illustration majors in their sophomore year. The
students approach major elements of technique, application, and theory in relation to becoming illustrators. Studio sessions involve basic problem solving, anatomy, pictorial composition,
media applications, figurative expression, use of reference tools, and illustrative techniques.
Class structure allows demonstrations of processes and experimentation for assignment development. Group and individual critiques will be used to evaluate work. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112
and FDTN-122 or equivalent courses and student standing in the ILLM-BFA or ILLS-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-214 
Anatomical Illustration
This course will provide and in depth anatomical approach to drawing the figure. Students will
obtain instruction and practice at drawing human anatomy including body and head postures,
facial expressions, and hand gestures. Students will be taught anatomical proportioning while
drawing from observation from models to convey emotions such as anger, sadness, fear, disgust, etc. Students will also learn to use photo support references. Works will be created in black
and white and in color media using light and dark, and warm and cool effects. (Prerequisites:
FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 or equivalent courses and student standing in the ILLM-BFA or
ILLS-BFA program.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-218 
Dimensional Illustration I
This course will introduce students to an alternative style of illustration that will expand their
thinking into the third dimension. Emphasis will be placed on planning and preparation of
compositional elements in three-dimensional sculptural form and creative problem solving.
Students will be encouraged to explore a variety of materials and techniques to complete projects. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 or equivalent courses and student standing in
the ILLM-BFA or ILLS-BFA program.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

71

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ILLS-219 
Digital Illustration I
Digital Illustration I will provide students with methods of conceptualizing, organizing and
executing illustrations using the computer. Projects will expose students to various types of
digital techniques using vector and raster-based software applications, and a variety of input
and output devices for the creation of professional level assignments. The course will emphasize
conceptual problem solving methodology and the language of visualization while providing a
consistent foundation for digital illustration as it relates to professional illustration production. Color systems, digital terminology and pre-press file formats will be also be covered.
(Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 or FDTN-132 or equivalent courses and student
standing in the ILLM-BFA or ILLS-BFA program.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ILLS-413 
Illustration III
This course focuses on preparing students to function as professional working illustrators.
Students will prepare and supply professional business materials such as job cost estimates,
work and job delivery schedules, etc. along with assignment work. Emphasis will be placed
on the development and creation of a variety of finished illustrations that will demonstrate
understanding of current industry standards. Students will gain insight into pricing, time management, and effective communication relative to the illustration profession. Creative problem
solving, stylistic self-expression, and technical proficiency will also be emphasized. Students will
participate in individual and group reviews and critiques. (This course is restricted to students
with at least 4th year standing in ILLS-BFA.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ILLS-313 
Illustration II
This course focuses on preparing students to create work for a variety of illustration markets
including the advertising, editorial, corporate and book publishing markets. Emphasis will be
placed on the development and creation of a variety of finished illustrations that will demonstrate understanding of current industry trends and standards. Students will gain insight into
the differences and nuances of these illustration specializations. Creative problem solving, stylistic self-expression, and technical proficiency will be emphasized. Students will participate
in individual and group reviews and critiques. (Prerequisites: ILLS-213 or equivalent course.)
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ILLS-461 
Illustration History
Illustration History will provide students with a historical overview and discussion of the field
of illustration. Students will be presented with illustration in a developmental context. Visual
examples, illustrators biographies, descriptive information, and terminology will define and
distinguish illustration and provide topics for discussion. The course will cover revolutionary
illustrators, evolutionary trends, and styles from 1880 to the present. Special emphasis will
be placed on particular illustrators whose artistic contributions to the field have defined and
influenced changes and new movements. Work in traditional mediums and more recent digital mediums will be covered. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and FDTN-121 or equivalent courses.)
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)

ILLS-319 
Digital Illustration II
Digital Illustration II will provide students with advanced methods of conceptualizing, organizing and executing illustrations using the computer. Projects will expose students to various
types of digital techniques using vector and raster-based software applications, and a variety
of input and output devices for the creation of professional level assignments. The course will
emphasize conceptual problem solving methodology and the language of visualization while
providing a consistent foundation for digital illustration as it relates to professional illustration production. Color systems, digital terminology and pre-press file formats will be also
be covered. (Prerequisites: ILLS-219 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLS-358 
Dimensional Illustration II
This course will offer students the option to continue an exploration of three-dimensional
illustration. Emphasis is placed on creative problem solving, drawing skills, planning, preparation, compositional elements of three-dimensional low relief and sculptural form. Students are
encouraged to explore a singular medium to complete projects in series presented in a consistent style. (Prerequisites: ILLS-218 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-364 
Editorial Illustration
Editorial Illustration takes an in-depth look at creating images for the newspaper and magazine
publishing industry. Emphasis will be placed on creating a wide variety of finished illustrations.
The course focuses on the visual interpretation of editorial subject matter. Critical thinking,
visual criticism, and rhetoric will also be a required component of work generation and conceptualizing. Presenting thumbnails that explore a variety of concepts is emphasized. This
course may be retaken one time. (Prerequisites: ILLS-213 or equivalent course.) Studio 5,
Credits 3 (Spring)

ILLS-462 
Journalistic Illustration
This course will familiarize students with the requirements of visually reporting a specific
happening or event. Assignments will be longer in duration and will consist of several major
works, many drawings, sketches, notes and photo references. This journalistic approach to
illustration demands that students attend an event and selectively record important aspects
that will best communicate the atmosphere and action of the scene. Extensive research, both
informational and visual is expected. A personal, editorial viewpoint is desired. This course will
familiarize students with methods and issues involving creating a series of images for the single
purpose of representing a story or illustrated sequence. Emphasis will be placed on choosing
important content and planning effective image sequences. Students will learn to share their
observations to clarify and embellish what might be commonplace for the non-visual observer.
(Prerequisites: ILLS-213 or equivalent course and 3rd year standing in the ILLS-BFA, ILLMBFA OR FNAS-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLS-465 
Book Illustration
This course focuses on preparing students to create work for the book publishing industry.
Emphasis will be placed on creating a wide variety of finished illustrations that will appeal to
picture book markets as well as a range of other publishing categories. To create a basis for their
illustrations, students will visualize existing narratives and/or author their own story concepts.
This will involve story development and storyboard conceptualization. Creative expression and
technical experimentation will be encouraged. The course will culminate with the student creating a completed dummy suitable for presentation to book publishers. (Prerequisites: ILLS-219
or equivalent course.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ILLS-369 
Digital Mixed Media
This course provides students with the opportunity to explore the creative potential presented
through the imaginative combination of both traditional and digital media. Students will be
expected to utilize and combine skills learned in traditional and digital illustration courses to
provide exciting and fresh illustrations unrestricted by a singular medium. (Prerequisites: ILLS213 and ILLS-219 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

ILLS-467 
Animating Digital Illustration
Animating Digital Illustration will provide an introduction to illustrating for multimedia projects by creating computer generated animations and presentations. Adobe Flash in combination
with other imaging and motion software will be used. Assignments will investigate not only
illustrated animation, but also sound, music, color and special effects. The course will emphasize conceptual problem solving methodology, color systems, digital terminology and motion
file formats. (Prerequisites: ILLS-219 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)

ILLS-379 
Digital Editorial
Digital Editorial will introduce students to editorial illustration. Importance will be placed on
interpretation of editorial subject matter and preparation of digital imagery for print reproduction. Students will apply approaches to creative illustration while creatively interpreting
editorial text and visual narratives. Students may use vector and raster-based software applications and a variety of input and output devices. Stylistic issues, conceptual strategies, production
restrictions, and color systems will also be covered. (Prerequisites: ILLS-213 and ILLS-219 or
equivalent courses.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)

ILLS-468 
Fantastic Illustration
Fantastic Illustration takes an in-depth look at creating images for the fantasy and sciencefiction publishing industry. Emphasis will be placed on creating a wide variety of finished
illustrations. The course focuses on the visual interpretation of subject matter specific to these
specialized genres of illustration. Critical thinking, visual criticism, and rhetoric will also be
a required component of work generation and imaginative conceptualizing. Stylistic options
and technical approaches to the subject matter will be emphasized. (ILLS-BFA, ILLM-BFA YR
3-4) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall)

ILLS-399 
Illustration Part-time Coop
The illustration co-op will provide students with the option to work in the illustration or visual communication field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on
the availability of positions and business job needs. Illustration co-ops must be approved and
sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term
(fall, spring, summer). (This course is restricted to at least 2nd year standing in ILLS-BFA.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ILLS-472 
Sketchbook Illustration
This course will facilitate the use of sketchbooks as a creative, developmental tool for illustrators and artists. Students will complete assignments by draw on location and in class to explore
subjects and environments to create a visual reference material in the form of a sketchbook
journal. Material documented in the sketchbook will then provide visual reference for more
complete illustrations. (This course is restricted to 3rd year undergraduate students in CIAS.)
Studio 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

72	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ILLS-477 
Caricature Illustration
This course will provide and in depth look and practice at creating humorous, symbolic or acerbic images of people for this specialized area within the field of Illustration. Assignments will
challenge students to create characters for a variety of purposes and media. Emphasis will be
placed on interpreting facial expressions, body postures, and clothing. Students will work in
black and white and in color media producing a wide variety of finished illustrations. Students
will be instructed in production methodologies, character diagramming, and color systems.
(ILLS-BFA, ILLM-BFA YR 3-4) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLS-482 
Political Cartooning
Political Cartooning is an introduction to this very popular, humorous approach of illustration that is widely used by newspaper and magazine publishers. Students will apply humorous,
satirical, ironic, etc. content to their illustrations. Research, brainstorming, and exploration
of techniques and media are emphasized. The history of visual joke telling is reviewed. (ILLSBFA, ILLM-BFA YR 3-4) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLS-498 
Illustration Internship
The illustration internship will provide students with the option to work in the illustration
or visual communication field. Students may apply for internships to businesses based on
the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of an
instructor and complete the Internship Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-499 
Illustration Co-op
The illustration co-op will provide students with the option to work in the illustration or visual communication field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on
the availability of positions and business job needs. Illustration co-ops must be approved and
sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from
the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-501 
Illustration Portfolio
Illustration Portfolio is the final preparatory course for the Illustration major. Its purpose
is to provide students with information, strategies and guided instruction to market themselves and organize and create their final portfolio. Writing will be a substantial component
of this course. The course will include marketing and business practices for the professional
illustrator. Students will receive individual critique and analysis of work created in prior studio classes and progress to the definition of a career agenda. Projects will be customized for
each students body of work and their career intentions. Presentation methods and business
protocol will also be addressed. The final culminating project will be a finished portfolio. In
addition to the portfolio document, students will be instructed in job seeking strategies including creating mailers and promotional materials, interviewing dynamics, resume writing, and
correspondence. (This course is restricted to students with at least 4th year standing in ILLSBFA.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLS-550 
Topics in Illustration
Focused investigation of, and practice in, a selected topic in illustration. Subject offerings will
vary by sub-field specializations in the illustration field. A subtopic course description will be
published each term course is offered. This course can be repeated. (This course is restricted
to GRDE-BFA, 3DDG-BFA, INDE-BFA, IDDE-BFA, NMDE-BFA, ILLS-BFA, ILLM-BFA and
FNAS-BFA programs with 3rd and 4th year level standing.Multiple Majors YR 3-4) Lecture/
Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-559 
Illustrative Design
Illustrative Design is an introduction to the principles and methods used to incorporate illustration with typography and layout. Students will conceptualize, organize and execute illustrations
within a design context. Illustrative Design will emphasize the use of graphic elements such as
symbols, charts, and type to be incorporated into illustrations. Layout terminology and illustration production methods will be included. Projects will expose students to various examples
of current, real-world assignments that will demand the use of traditional illustration methods as well as computer-based production media. Assignments will stress solutions that are
typically managed by art directors and designers. The course will emphasize the language of
visualization and the relationship and coordination of concept, illustration and word. This
course may be repeated once for a total of six credits. (Prerequisites: ILLS-219 or equivalent
course.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLS-563 
Zoological and Botanical Illustration
This course utilizes subjects found in the natural world as resources for applied and fine art
applications. Working from live and preserved subjects, students will accurately depict animal
and plant images, which may be used descriptively in print and electronic media. (Prerequisites:
FDTN-112 and FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 and a student in the ILLS-BFA or ILLM-BFA program.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

ILLS-568 
Pop-Up Books
This course will deal with constructing and illustrating pop-up and mechanical books. Students
will study planning, preparation, engineering and illustration for production of pop-ups. The
course will be divided into a preliminary section of learning basic mechanisms of pop-up books
and a second section, which allows students to apply knowledge learned in the first section
to the illustration and production of their own book. (Prerequisites: ILLS-218 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLS-569 
Advertising Illustration
This course will deal with creating illustrations used to advertise products, services and events.
Assigned projects will give students a better understanding of the wide range of assignments
advertising illustrators are asked to produce by advertising agencies and corporate accounts.
Students will experience the fast paced working conditions inherent in the advertising industry. (This course is restricted to 3rd year undergraduate students in CIAS.) Studio, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
ILLS-599 
Illustration Independent Study
Illustration Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized
area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor will
propose a course of study. Illustration Independent Study students must obtain permission
of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Medical Illustration
ILLM-399 
Medical Illustration Part-time Coop
The medical illustration co-op will provide students with the opportunity to work alongside
of practicing medical illustrators in various branches of the profession. Students may apply
forcCo-ops with businesses and educational institutions based on the availability of positions
and company job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the
Co-op Form to enroll. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time
(10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall,
spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ILLM-498 
Medical Illustration Internship
The medical illustration internship will provide students with the option to work with practicing professionals in a business or educational environment. Students may apply for internships
to businesses and educational institutions based on the availability of positions and company needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Internship
Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
ILLM-499 
Medical Illustration Coop
The medical illustration co-op will provide students with the opportunity to work alongside of
practicing medical illustrators in various branches of the profession. Students may apply for
Co-ops with businesses and educational institutions based on the availability of positions and
company job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Co-op
Form to enroll. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
ILLM-501 
Human Gross Anatomy
An in-depth study of the structure of the human body. Emphasis is on understanding the relationships between anatomical structures as well as their form, texture, and color. Dissection
of a human cadaver is supplemented with lectures on the structure and function of the major
organ systems. (Prerequisites: MEDS-251 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 6 (Fall)
ILLM-502 
Illustrating Human Anatomy
Drawings of lab dissections and the skeleton will be translated into illustrations designed to
support instruction in Human Gross Anatomy. Course teaches what choices need to be made
when translating literal drawings into illustrations that support instruction. The target learner
for these illustrations is a student attending Human Gross Anatomy at a graduate level. (This
course is restricted to students with 3rd year standing in the ILLM-BFA program.) Studio 5,
Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLM-503 
3D Modeling of Organic Forms
This course introduces strategies used to create NURBS and polygonal models of organic subjects in a three-dimensional environment. Assignments stress accurate portrayal of proportions,
form, and texture. Instruction will also focus on creating lighting and shader networks that
emphasize form and are consistent with surface characteristics. (Prerequisites: FDTN-131 or
equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

73

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

ILLM-507 
Computer Applications in Medical Illustration
Students will learn to use industry-standard raster and vector illustration software to create
images of assigned medical subjects. Students will also use page layout applications to combine digital images with text and other graphic elements. Coursework emphasizes creation
of illustrations to support medical education and publishing. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 and
FDTN-122 and MEDG-102 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2, Studio 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-508 
Scientific Visualization
Emerging technologies enable scientists to visualize structures that are otherwise invisible to
the naked eye. For example, molecular visualization software allows us to construct highly
accurate molecular models from x-ray crystallography and other structural data. Cryo-EM
and confocal microscopy are revealing the previously unknown structure of cellular organelles.
Medical imaging systems allow us to reconstruct the human body in three dimensions from
actual patient data (CT scans, MRI, etc.). This course explores the use of these technologies
to provide references for traditional artwork and to export models for digital rendering and
animation. (Prerequisites: ILLM-501 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-512 
Surgical Illustration
Students observe live surgical procedures and translate their sketches into finished illustrations that are used in medical training, patient education, and litigation. Demonstrations of
sketching and rendering techniques are supplemented with lectures on general surgical principles and common procedures. (Prerequisites: ILLM-501 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLM-515 
Contemporary Media I
This course is an introduction to two-dimensional computer illustration, animation, and interactive media as they apply to contemporary methods of instruction in medicine and allied
health. Students will be assigned topics in health care and develop an interactive lesson to support instruction of their topic. Students will organize these lessons as a web site. (Prerequisites:
ILLM-507 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
ILLM-516 
Contemporary Media II
This course continues the development of a student-created web site designed to assist teaching
topics in medicine and allied health. Advanced topics in two-dimensional computer illustration, animation, and interactive media as they apply to contemporary methods of instruction
in medicine and allied health, will be presented. (Prerequisites: ILLM-515 or equivalent course.
ILLM-515 Prereq) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-517 
Portfolio and Business Practices
This course helps prepare students to enter the workforce in full-time positions or as freelance
illustrators. Students create a traditional portfolio, personal identity package, and marketing
materials. The course also introduces important business concepts such as copyright, licensing, pricing, contracts, taxation, and formation of a proper business. (This course is restricted
to 4th year students in the ILLM-BFA program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-518 
Eye Ear and Nose Prosthetics
Eye Ear Nosemaking is an introduction to maxillofacial prosthetics. Focusing on anaplastology with additional work in the process of artificial eye-making, students will create life masks
on which orbitals, noses and ears can be modeled, cast and produced. Lecture 2, Studio 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
ILLM-599 
Medical Illustration Independent Study
Medical Illustration Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a
specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty
advisor will propose a course of study. Medical Illustration Independent Study students must
obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to
enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

School of Design
3D Digital Design
DDDD-101 
Introduction to Modeling and Motion
This course is an introduction to the representation of form and motion in three-dimensional
software. The course focuses on the development of visual and verbal vocabulary as a means
of exploring, developing, and understanding composition and motion with digital geometry
and in virtual spaces. Topics include the basics of lines, planes, contour, transforming lines into
form, composing images with a software camera, interaction of light and surface, perspective,
resolution of geometry, and rendering. Perception and visual thinking are emphasized in the
development of projects. Projects will include modeling organic and inorganic forms, composition, level of detail, creation of spaces and motion. Structured assignments develop skills in
concept generation, basic form making, techniques for creating motion, and craftsmanship.
Emphasis is placed on workflow, teamwork, and the technical and aesthetic aspects of each
project. (3DDG-BFA) Lecture 4, Studio 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-102 
Introduction to Visual Design
This course is an introduction to the development of surface materials in three- dimensional
software, using the basic concepts covered in Intro to 3DDG Modeling and Motion. Principles
of additive and subtractive color are developed as they relate to the interpretation of physical phenomena within a virtual world. The vocabulary expands to include the interaction
of light and surface attributes including: color, relief, specularity, transparency, and more.
Projects focus on using color, value and texture to enhance the representation of form and
space. The basics of node based materials design is introduced. Additional techniques for UV
layout are introduced. Concepts are introduced through lectures, discussions, demonstrations,
research, assigned projects, and critiques. Assignments develop skills in surface design, lighting
and rendering. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to students in 3DDG-BFA.Co-requisite:
DDDD-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
DDDD-103 
Imaging for 3D
This course provides experience in generating images, both still and moving, for use with the
three-dimensional software environment. Students learn techniques for drawing perspective
and orthographic views as well as cabinet drawings, oblique drawings, and other techniques.
Students learn to create curves to import for model creation, to capture images photographically to use as textures, to create wrapping textures, to compile multiple frames into a movie,
to merge segments together into a single movie, to record and incorporate audio elements,
and to export results to the web and other media. Students learn to use a green screen to add
live elements to their work. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who
have completed DDDD-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Studio 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
DDDD-201 
Modeling Strategies
This course provides extensive coverage of methods for modeling where evaluation of the
appropriate modeling method to use in various situations is key. The emphasis in the course
is on problem solving. Modeling challenges of various types are incorporated into the projects.
With these techniques students create complex models of organic and inorganic forms using
many techniques. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-101 or equivalent course.) Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-202 
Layers and Effects
Students learn to utilize render layers and to create effects using software that makes it possible to incorporate multiple layers of image and audio into a single project. Issues related to
integrating images created using different renders is covered. Emphasis is placed on incorporating various elements into a cohesive whole matching lighting and perspective. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-102 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
DDDD-203 Scripting
This course covers the use of scripts to control various aspects of three-dimensional environments, models, textures, motion, production workflow and more. Students develop scripts to
control particles, models, textures, motion, and interaction with the environment. Additionally
students gain experience downloading scripts to micro controllers. (Prerequisites: This class
is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-101 or equivalent course.)
Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-206 
Service Project
The course focuses on playing a supportive role in the development of a three- dimensional
digital design project from the planning stage, through completion and presentation. Emphasis
is placed on working effectively on a team and providing leadership in a supportive team
role. Methods for clearly communicating with a client are addressed including sketches, reference images, flowcharts and storyboards. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA
students who have completed DDDD-102 and DDDD-201 or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

74	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

DDDD-207 
Lighting, Materials, and Rendering
The course focuses on advanced techniques in lighting, materials, and rendering. Students light
objects and spaces. They use shading networks to incorporate groups of two-dimensional and
three-dimensional textures into realistic and non-photorealistic materials. Students learn to
use texture maps instead of detail in models to increase interaction speeds. Textures are to prototype simple models into complex scenes before completion of final geometry. Displacement
textures are used to create detail in models. Use of the node-based system to control many
aspects of the 3D environment is covered. Use of textures to simulate non-dynamic lights and
shadows is introduced. Planning for the economical use of textures and for the replacement of
models with texture maps in level of detail (LOD) situations will be addressed as well. Students
learn to design effective render layers. They learn the strengths and weaknesses of various renderers and are able to make effective judgments about which renderer to use in a given situation.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-202
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
DDDD-208 
Anatomical Figure Drawing
Lessons introduced in lecture will be applied during figure drawing sessions. These lessons
describe a proportion system developed by Robert Beverly Hale to define the human skeleton.
After studying the skeleton, the course focuses on all major muscle groups and their influence
on the human form. (3DDG-BFA) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
DDDD-302 
History of Digital Graphics
As a historical overview of computer graphics design, this course covers the development of
digitally based graphics and imagery from its pre history to the present. It touches on related
technology and the growth of the computer industry. Major pioneers and their contributions
are reviewed. The course traces the use of digital technology in the creation of graphics for
design, interactive media, fine art, animation, visualization, and performance. (3DDG-BFA)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-306 
Project Planning and Production
In this course students learn to develop design documents, timelines, budgets, marketing plans,
and supporting material for potential projects. A project of their own design is then fully
implemented and presented at the end of the term. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to
3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-301 or (2014-411 and 2014-513) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
DDDD-399 
3D Digital Design Part-time Coop
The three-dimensional digital design co-op will provide students with the option to work in the
3D digital design field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the
availability of positions and business job needs. 3D Digital Design co-ops must be approved and
sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term
(fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
DDDD-401 
Senior Thesis Testing and Documentation
The course focuses on implementing a three-dimensional digital design project from the planning stage, through completion and presentation. By the end of the term the student will have
completed most of the project and have made all of the aesthetic decisions relative to the project in preparation for an intense critique at the end of the quarter. (Prerequisites: This class
is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-306 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-402 
Senior Thesis I
The course focuses on implementing a three-dimensional digital design project from the planning stage, through completion and presentation. By the end of the term the student will have
completed most of the project and have made all of the aesthetic decisions relative to the project in preparation for an intense critique at the end of the quarter. (3DDG-BFA) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
DDDD-403 
Senior Thesis II
The course focuses on the completion of a major three-dimensional digital design project from
the planning stage, through completion and presentation. Based on the feedback received in
the critique at the end of the previous term, students refine and complete their project and
prepare to submit their work to competitions and integrate it into their portfolio. (3DDGBFA) Lecture 3, Credits 3

	

DDDD-498 
3D Digital Design Internship
This course exposes students to the professional environment through outside job opportunities in at places of employment that utilize three-dimensional software for various applications
and other acceptable organizations. Students will work under the guidance of Art Directors,
Technical Directors, or other professionals in the field and perform creative work that is educational and meaningful for their short-term academic goals as well as their long-range career
preparation. Documentation of the experience is required and final review from employer is
required documenting the kind and quality of work performed. Students must obtain preapproval of their department and complete the Internship Approval Form. Credit earned is
used toward elective or major elective credits. (3DDG-BFA) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
DDDD-499 
3D Digital Design Coop
The three-dimensional digital design co-op will provide students with the option to work in the
3D digital design field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the
availability of positions and business job needs. 3D Digital Design co-ops must be approved and
sponsored by a faculty advisor. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term
(fall, spring, summer). (3DDG-BFA YR 2-4) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
DDDD-516 
Advanced Studio
This course focuses on students working more independently to explore an area of threedimensional digital design not covered in other course work. Students will work closely with
the instructor to research and complete tutorials in a new area. They will develop skills in that
area and then create a tutorial explaining what they have learned. They will present what they
have learned to the rest of the class as a means of extending their knowledge into specialized
areas that are not covered in other course. Students must have an area of exploration defined
in writing in advance of enrolling in the course, which must be approved by the instructor.
This course is repeatable. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who
have completed DDDD-306 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
DDDD-517 
Experimental Workshop
The course focuses on implementing, advanced, newly developing ideas in three-dimensional
computer graphics. The specific topic varies and is determined by the instructor. A specific
course outline is provided each time the course is taught. Potential topics include the creation
of interactive installations, game asset design, digital performances, cyber fashion, network
art, locative media, scientific visualization, information visualization, event design, projection design, or any new area in digital design. This course has a subtopic and may be repeated
with different subtopics; subtopics cannot be repeated. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-206 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
DDDD-521 
Character Design and Rigging
This course covers first the design of characters and then the creation of them using threedimensional software, inverse kinematics, parent and rigid binding, bones, and deformers.
Students design characters using techniques like interpretant matrices, model sheets, sketches, and maquettes followed by development of the actual character in software. Characters are
designed for incorporation into motion graphics, games, real time applications, performance,
or visualization. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-201 and DDDD-203 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2, Studio 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-522 
Environment Design
This course covers modeling techniques useful in developing environments, both interior
and exterior. The content of the course covers proportions appropriate to a variety of environments, lighting for spaces, surface design to replicate real world materials, and building
to an appropriate level of detail for the circumstance. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to
3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-201 and DDDD-207 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture 2, Studio 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-523 
Hard Surface Modeling
The course focuses on designing and constructing hard surface models including machinery,
furniture, vehicles, electronics, and robots. Students explore the use of different modeling
techniques in the process and are particularly interested in the flow of the topology within the
geometry. Some attention is given to creating controls for moving the hard surface models.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-201
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
DDDD-526 
Physical Interface Design
This course covers the use of basic electronics so that students can develop embedded systems
or controllers for games, design environments with ambient intelligence, design interactive
museum exhibits and point of purchase installations, or embed electronics in clothing. Students
use micro controllers, sensors, switches, lights, and motors to implement their designs. (This
class is restricted to students in 3DDG-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Studio,
Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

75

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

DDDD-527 
Real Time Design
In this course students design levels for games or virtual worlds for a variety of applications.
Once the design is complete, the design is implemented using high-end three-dimensional
software. In many cases the projects will be large and will be executed by teams of students.
Versioning systems will be used to keep track of the most recently developed assets. Models are
imported into real time software engines for manipulation. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2,
Studio 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

GRDE-206 
Typography and Imagery
Students expand upon the principles of grid theory, text and display typography, sequence,
page layout, and type and image integration as they relate to a range of design applications:
posters, instructional materials, brochures, magazines, books, etc. Visual organization and message communication are stressed. This course builds upon the content taught in Typography
and Design Imagery courses. Appropriate layout and imaging software skills are integrated.
(Prerequisites: GRDE-201 and GRDE-202 and 2nd year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

DDDD-528 
Simulating Natural Phenomena
In this course students use learn to simulate gasses, liquids and forces as well as develop
complex organic systems in natural environments. Students employ particle systems, physics
engines, l-systems, and software designed especially for developing richly detailed natural environments. The content of the course encompasses both modeling natural environments and
also phenomena in motion; such has windstorms, fire, cloth, hair, fur, and water. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to 3DDG-BFA students who have completed DDDD-201 and DDDD207 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2, Studio 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

GRDE-207 
Interactive Media Design
This course is an introduction to the concepts, uses, and general principles of interactive media
on the computer. The course will explore several planning and organizing methods and how
they can be used in this design process. Concepts and principles in site design, page design,
interface design, and usability will be studied and applied to interactive projects. Students
will be encouraged to explore highly structured as well as highly experimental approaches to
merging content with interactivity design. Aspects of social-cultural issues in new media will
be incorporated. (Prerequisites: GRDE-201 and GRDE-202 and 2nd year standing in GRDEBFA.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)

DDDD-599 
3D Digital Design Independent Study
3D Digital Design Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study. 3D Digital Design independent study students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. (This
course is restricted to students in 3DDG-BFA with at least 3rd year standing.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Graphic Design
GRDE-106 
Elements of Graphic Design
Introduction to basic visual communications in the field of graphic design. Lectures will cover graphic design topics and information ranging from typographic terminology and design
principles to methods of visual organization. Assignments will be undertaken in the studio
where hands-on introduction to graphic design studio skills and practices will occur. Through
formal studies and perceptual understanding, including aesthetics, graphic form and structure, concept development problems and visual organization, students will design solutions to
visual communication problems. Assignments will explore aspects of graphic imagery, typography, hierarchy, and layout. Students will refine their computer skills through applications
requiring digital formats. (Prerequisites: FDTN-111 and FDTN-121 or equivalent courses and
undergraduate standing in GRDE-BFA. Co-requisite: GRDE-107 or equivalent course.) Studio,
Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
GRDE-107 
Time-Based Design
This course is an introduction to the concepts, principles and techniques of time-based design.
Planning and organization methods, kinetics, animation principles, sequencing, composition,
visual variables, and forms of narrative will be studied and applied to specific design projects.
This course will incorporate both traditional and digital design based projects. Projects will
introduce imagery and/or typography components, storyboard planning, and computer-based
applications as they apply to design problem solving. (Prerequisites: FDTN-111 and FDTN-121
or equivalent courses and undergraduate standing in GRDE-BFA. Co-requisite: GRDE-106 or
equivalent course.) Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
GRDE-201 Typography
This course is an introduction to the fundamental principles of typography (the visual representation of language) to effectively convey information and ideas to specific audiences. This
course also builds on the brief basic intro of typography that is integrated into the 2D Graphic
Design course. Focus is on the communicative function and aesthetic nature of typographic
problem-solving. Exercises help students understand typographic hierarchy, grid structure,
form and communication. Lectures cover typographic terminology and anatomy, history of
typography as well as type classification, type measurement, and issues of legibility and readability. Once students have been introduced to the fundamentals of typography, they will
include imagery as appropriate. Students will also refine their skills in using relevant software.
(Prerequisites: GRDE-106 or equivalent course and 2nd year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Lab,
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
GRDE-205 
History of Graphic Design
This course is a thematic approach to the history of graphic design and provides a necessary
historical basis for students in the graphic design program. The course involves lectures on
design history, pioneering Modernist designers, design from other countries, exemplars from
the field, all set in a wider historical context. Lectures are complemented by guest speakers,
videos, participatory exercises, discussion, and critical essay writing. (Prerequisities: ARTH136 or equivalent course and 2nd year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

76	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

GRDE-301 
Information Design
This course explores the importance of reader and user responses to written and visually presented information. Problem-solving, functional requirements, information transmission,
accessibility and design structure are integrated while investigating a variety of formats (i.e.
charts, diagrams, business forms, tables, maps, instructional materials, wayfinding systems,
and technical data.) Applied problems are solved through principles of language, structure,
diagrammatic interpretation and the visual display of information. Solutions will be developed for both print media and digital use (i.e. mobile devises, computer screens, kiosks, etc.).
(Prerequisites: GRDE-206 or equivalent course and at least 3rd year standing in GRDE-BFA.)
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
GRDE-302 
Web and User Interface Design
This course is an introduction to the planning, design, and production of interactive projects
that are web based. Students will be introduced to web design concepts and principles in site
design, page design, graphical user interface design, and usability. The course will include
instruction in building pages and creating interactive functions with HTML, CSS, and web
production software. Students will be encouraged to explore highly structured as well as highly experimental approaches to merging content with interactivity design. The course will also
incorporate social-cultural issues in new media. (Prerequisites: GRDE-207 and 3rd year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
GRDE-306 
Professional Practices
Students will learn about strategies to obtain internships and permanent employment in the
graphic design profession. Emphasis will be placed on learning about the various types of
positions available to designers, the designer/client relationship, business aspects of design,
and professional ethics and expectations. Information about promotional materials, including resume and portfolio design, and implementation will be covered in order to prepare
students to present themselves and their work effectively and professionally. (Prerequisites:
GRDE-301 and GRDE-302 or equivalent courses and 3rd year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
GRDE-307 
Design Systems and Methodology
This course provides students with conceptual, organizational and systematic problem-solving
methods to create unified and effective design systems using multiple components. Research,
concept generation, visual symbolism and other methods will be used to establish a common framework to create applied systems. The value and roles of constants and variables in
design development and implementation are explored. Effectiveness of solutions is determined
through the use of selected evaluation methods within key phases of each project. Visual and
verbal articulation is emphasized in relation to systems explanations and integration. Design
writing, professionalism and technical proficiency are also stressed. (Prerequisites: GRDE301 and GRDE-302 or equivalent courses and 3rd year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Lab, Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
GRDE-308 
Environmental Graphic Design
This course focuses on design problem-solving for three-dimensional spaces and environments
with the purpose of directing and/or informing identified audiences. Conceptual development
and final design solutions are developed to assist users in negotiating through various interior
and exterior environments. Topics include: communication theory, ergonomics and human
factors, visual aesthetics, and design methodology. Areas of application may include: architectural graphics, signage systems, mapping, exhibit design, themed museum experiences, and
dynamic environments. Two-dimensional, three-dimensional, and digital design attributes are
incorporated using appropriate materials and software for both physical and interactive solutions. (Prerequisites: GRDE-301 and GRDE-302 or equivalent courses and 3rd year standing
in GRDE-BFA.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

GRDE-322 
Women Pioneers in Design
This course will center on the contributions made by Modernist women designers. Emphasis
will be placed on their design works, their design process and the nature of their unheralded
pioneering efforts. Exemplars from the field will be presented, set in an historical context.
Lectures are complemented by guest speakers, videos, participatory exercises, discussion, and
critical essay writing. (This course is restricted to undergraduate students in CIAS with at least
2nd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
GRDE-326 
20th Century Editorial Design History
This course is a thematic approach to the history of magazine design and provides a necessary historical basis for students in the visual arts and design. The course involves lectures on
editorial designers, other pioneering Modernist designers, and design from other countries.
Exemplars from the field are presented, set in a wide historical context. Lectures are complemented by guest speakers, videos, participatory exercises, discussion, and critical essay writing.
(This course is restricted to undergraduate students in CIAS with at least 2nd year standing.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
GRDE-367 
Graphic Design in Film
An interdisciplinary design history course that will afford students the opportunity to critically study the history of graphic design through viewing seminal motion pictures. Students
will be required to view films, write essays on film themes and participate in discussions about
the films. Lectures will complement the film showings. (This course is restricted to undergraduate students in CIAS with at least 2nd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-399 
Graphic Design Part-time Coop
The graphic design co-op will provide students with the option to work in the graphic design/
visual communication field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on
the availability of positions and business job needs. Co-ops must be approved and registered
with the Career Services/Co-op office. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be
either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT
term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GRDE-401 
Collaborative Design
This course offers students the opportunity and challenge of working on interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary teams to create professional level projects, which are collaborative, competitive and cooperative in structure and implementation. The content of the course will vary
depending upon faculty expertise and coordination between departments, schools and colleges,
as well as possible outside non-profit clients. (Prerequisites: GRDE-306 and GRDE-308 and 4th
year standing in GRDE-BFA.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-411 
Senior Portfolio Development
This course will provide the skills necessary to design and present a professional portfolio of
design work in the pursuit of a creative career. Students will identify and target viable and
appropriate employment prospects, and design a format for the continual inclusion of subsequent work. Additionally, students will engage in a large-scale, comprehensive project intended
to showcase their strengths and support their professional goals. A digital portfolio component
is required. This course draws upon the knowledge and skills students have gained through
their major program courses in the Graphic Design curriculum to produce a professional portfolio. (Prerequisites: GRDE-306, GRDE-307 and GRDE-308 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2,
Studio 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-418 
Editorial Design
This course will explore the role of a graphic designer/art director in developing effective and
innovative communication for editorial design. Students will work on interdisciplinary teams
(with photographers and/or illustrators) to create visual solutions for in-class projects and/or
a magazine produced by the class. Design development processes and aspects of production
methods will be implemented. (Prerequisites: GRDE-401 and GRDE-421 and 4th year standing in the GRDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-421 
Branding and Identity Design
This course provides an overview of branding and identity design as an integrated study within
the field of graphic design. By utilizing brand processes, theories, and design methodology,
brand strategy, positioning, touch-points, research, and management will be considered in
the process of creating comprehensive branding and identity systems. Past and present case
studies will provide students historical background and explore current and future trends in
design for branding. (Prerequisites: GRDE-306 and GRDE-308 and 4th year standing in GRDEBFA.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

GRDE-422 
Advanced Interactive Media and Web Design
This course covers advanced web and interactive media design concepts, principles and processes. Students develop and refine skills in project planning, site design, page design, graphical
user interface design, and usability through applied projects. Students will be encouraged
to explore highly structured as well as highly experimental approaches to merging content
with interactivity design. The course will also incorporate social-cultural issues in new media.
(Prerequisites: GRDE-401 and GRDE-421 and 4th year standing in the GRDE-BFA program.)
Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-423 
Advanced Information Design
This course is an advanced exploration of the importance of reader and user responses to written and visually presented information. The aims are to instill a broader awareness and a deeper
appreciation for information design and to help develop a more critical eye for affecting the
transmission and reception of information. It is also to help students develop as much concern
for what a design does as for how a design looks. Problem-solving, functional requirements,
information transmission, accessibility and design structure are integrated while investigating
a variety of formats (i.e. charts, diagrams, business forms, tables, maps, instructional materials, wayfinding systems, and technical data.) Advanced applied problems are solved through
principles of language, structure, diagrammatic interpretation and the visual display of information. Solutions will be developed for both print media and digital use (i.e. mobile devises,
computer screens, kiosks, etc.). (Prerequisites: GRDE-401 and GRDE-421 and 4th year standing in the GRDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-431 
Packaging Design
This senior level graphic design course focuses on the design of physical packaging for the protection and marketing of goods. Aspects of visual, structural, ergonomic and environmental
issues are considered in the design of rigid and flexible containers. Taught as a team/collaborative course, students from graphic design, packaging science, and industrial design will work
together to develop effective packaging design solutions. (Prerequisites: GRDE-308 and 4th
year student standing in GRDE-BFA.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-448 
Senior Internship
This course exposes students to the professional environment through outside job opportunities in graphic design studios, advertising agencies, corporate communications departments
and other acceptable organizations. Students will work under the guidance of Art Directors,
Creative Directors, Senior Graphic Designers or Marketing Communications Managers and
perform creative work that is educational and meaningful for their short-term academic goals
as well as their long-range career preparation. Students will obtain pre-approval from their faculty advisor in advance of serving the internship. Documentation of the experience is required
and final review from employer is obtained. Faculty advisor will meet with the student upon
completion for final evaluation for a grade. (Enrollment in this course requires permission
from the department offering the course.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-498 
Graphic Design Internship
This course exposes students to the professional environment through outside job opportunities in graphic design studios, advertising agencies, corporate communications departments
and other acceptable organizations. Students will work under the guidance of Art Directors,
Creative Directors, Senior Graphic Designers or Marketing Communications Managers and
perform creative work that is educational and meaningful for their short-term academic goals
as well as their long-range career preparation. Documentation of the experience is required
and final review from employer is obtained. The appointed faculty advisor will meet with the
student upon completion for final evaluation for a grade. Students must obtain pre-approval
of their department and complete the Internship Approval Form. Credit earned is used toward
elective credits. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering
the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
GRDE-499 
Graphic Design Co-op
The graphic design co-op will provide students with the option to work in the graphic design/
visual communication field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on
the availability of positions and business job needs. Co-ops must be approved and registered
with the Career Services/Co-op office. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be
either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT
term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GRDE-599 
Graphic Design Independent Study
Independent study will provide students with the ability to focus in a specialized area of graphic
design with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study. The independent study student must obtain permission of an
instructor and department by completing the Independent Study Proposal Form to enroll.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

77

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

Industrial Design
IDDE-102 
Design Drawing
This course is an introduction to drawing objects and three-dimensional space. Students will
understand and use the basics of perspective sketching, developing grids and mechanical perspective and orthogonal views. (Prerequisites: FDTN-111 or equivalent course and enrollment
in the IDDE-BFA program.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
IDDE-202 
Sophomore ID Studio II
In this course, design projects are conceived as the result of close contact between students
and real-world sponsors in the manufacturing sector. Students work with a specific manufacturing entity in order to understand its capabilities. Research is conducted in the field and
shared within the classroom to enhance the understanding of the realities associated with
production. Students are challenged to improve their ability to define problems, generate and
promote concepts, evaluate their work and offer refinements of solutions. In short, they will
learn to derive inspiration from the material world and marketplace while simultaneously
bringing inspiration to it. (Prerequisites: IDDE-201 or equivalent course and a student in the
IDDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
IDDE-206 
ID Form
ID form emphasizes the cognitive and the technical skills necessary to manipulate material for the accurate three-dimensional communication of design intent. Projects focus on
understanding the relationship of materials, manufacturing processes, products and the user.
(Prerequisites: FDTN-132 or equivalent course and a student in the IDDE-BFA program.)
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
IDDE-207 
ID Digital Drawing
This visualization course develops more advanced analog and digital visualization techniques,
while expanding on graphic and three-dimensional components needed to create effective presentations and the workflows to achieve them. Assignments will expose students to various
types of digital techniques, using vector and raster-based software applications and a variety
of input and output devices for the creation of professional level assignments. (IDDE-102 and
IDDE-BFA) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
IDDE-211 
Human Factors Applications
This course emphasizes human characteristics, capabilities and limitations as the primary
design criterion in understanding, designing and analyzing systems, displays, controls, tools,
and workstations. (Prerequisites: IDDE-201 or equivalent course and a student in the IDDEBFA program.) Studio 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IDDE-212 
Integrated CAD
Develop the skills needed to effectively develop and communicate design concepts graphically, digitally and three-dimensionally, consistent with professional industrial design practice
standards. Emphasis is placed on the development, integration and application of Computer
Aided Design (CAD) skills throughout the assignments, utilizing the relationship of analog
and digital mediums as a means of enriching the design process. (Prerequisites: IDDE-207 or
equivalent course and student standing in the IDDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
IDDE-223 
History of Modern Furniture
A study of Modern furniture and its most significant designers. Factors of style, materials, construction and ergonomics are examined in the context of time, place and purpose.
(Prerequisites: ARTH-136 or equivalent course and a student in the IDDE-BFA program.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IDDE-301 
Junior ID Studio I
Students will explore the benefits and challenges of working with a design team to address
a complex product, problem, or system. Students will explore group dynamics, creativity in
design teams, as well as the nature of complex problems and the various methods required to
solve them. (Prerequisites: IDDE-202 and IDDE-211 and IDDE-212 or equivalent courses or
minimum 3rd year standing in IDDE-BFA.) Studio, Credits 4 (Fall)
IDDE-306 
Materials and Processes
This course is designed to help students develop a theoretical understanding and technical
competency in materials and processes applications as commonly. (Prerequisites: IDDE-202
and IDDE-211 and IDDE-212 or equivalent courses or minimum 3rd year standing in IDDEBFA.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IDDE-307 
Graphic Tactics
This course provides industrial design students with an introduction to the design and application of graphic elements to objects and environments. (Prerequisites: IDDE-202 and IDDE-211
and IDDE-212 or equivalent courses or minimum 3rd year standing in IDDE-BFA.) Lab,
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

78	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

IDDE-311 
ID Career Planning
This course is an introduction to the business of design. Field trips, guest lecturers and discussion of current trends help students understand the various employment opportunities
for the design professional. Students will explore careers within industrial design and define
their professional aspirations. The course will also cover the mechanics of job searching, creating a resume, cover letter, portfolio and interviewing to help prepare for design internships.
(Prerequisites: IDDE-302 and IDDE-306 or equivalent courses and a student in the IDDE-BFA
program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
IDDE-359 
Fabrication Techniques
This course provides industrial design students with an introduction to the application of various additive and subtractive fabrication methodologies, techniques and technologies. (This
course is restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing in IDDE-BFA.) Studio 6, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
IDDE-399 
Industrial Design Part-time Coop
The industrial design co-op provides students the option to work in the industrial design
field. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk)
or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer).
Minimum 3rd year standing and permission of instructor. (IDDE-BFA YR 3-4) Co-op, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IDDE-406 
Professional Practice
An in-depth look at business of design, and employment as a design professional for students
beginning the job search. Students will refine their resume, cover letter, and portfolio developed in Professional Practice I as they identify career options through research and networking
with professionals in their chosen area. Students will explore the financial and legal aspects of
employment in the design business. (Prerequisites: (IDDE-302 and IDDE-311) or (2035-410
and IDDE-311) or equivalent courses.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
IDDE-407 
ID Senior Capstone I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence in which an industrial design capstone project
is developed. Focus is on establishing content, planning, scheduling and research of a capstone
project that explores the social elements of design either in a collaborative design process, or
in the broader social impact of design decisions. Early stages of capstone development include
ideation, concept refinement and evaluation. The capstone project is approved by a faculty committee. (Prerequisites: (IDDE-302 and IDDE-311) or (2035-410 and IDDE-311) or equivalent
courses.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
IDDE-408 
ID Senior Capstone II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence in which an industrial design capstone project is developed. Focus is on finalizing design solution, presenting it in a capstone show, and
creating a written document that addresses how the theories and methods used in the project
have an impact on the current and future state of design in society. The capstone project is
approved by a faculty committee. (Prerequisites: IDDE-407 or equivalent course and a student
in the IDDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
IDDE-498 
Industrial Design Internship
The industrial design internship provides students the option to work in the Industrial Design
field. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Internship Permission
Form to enroll.. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering
the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IDDE-499 
Industrial Design Co-op
The industrial design co-op provides students the option to work in the industrial design
field. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk)
or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer).
Minimum 3rd year standing and permission of instructor. (Enrollment in this course requires
permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IDDE-501 
Senior ID Studio I
This course will explore the application of design methods and skills to projects addressing
large-community and global problems requiring team-based, trans-disciplinary collaborations. (Prerequisites: (IDDE-302 and IDDE-311) or (2035-410 and IDDE-311) or equivalent
courses.) Studio, Credits 4 (Fall)
IDDE-502 
Senior ID Studio II
The application of design methods and skills to advanced level projects addressing users with
unique, non-traditional needs requiring multi-disciplinary collaborations. Project development
will emulate processes used in professional industrial design practice. (Prerequisites: IDDE501 or equivalent course and a student in the IDDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 4 (Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

IDDE-520 
The Studio 2.0
The course focuses on implementing developing ideas in art, design and craft. The specific subtopics for this course will vary each time it is taught. As a result this course may be repeated. The
subtopic is determined by the instructor. The subtopic cannot be repeated. Potential topics may
include the creation of public spaces, products, analog and digital fabrication, furniture, interdisciplinary collaborations, etc. (This class is restricted to students in FNAS-BFA, ILLS-BFA,
ILLM-BFA, CCER-BFA, METAL-BFA, GLASS-BFA, WOOD-BFA, GRDE-BFA, NMDE-BFA,
IDDE-BFA, 3DDG-BFA and INDE-BFA.) Lecture 1, Studio 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IDDE-561 
Advanced CAD Applications I
An introduction to advanced techniques for modeling, presenting, and communicating the
“design intent” of a product concept. (Prerequisites: IDDE-207 or equivalent course.) Studio
6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IDDE-569 
Masters Seminar
The master’s seminar is a forum for cross-disciplinary presentations and discussions of methods, techniques, processes and interpretations. Luminaries discuss conceptual and practical
“studio” activities, their current and past endeavors and the contextualization of their work.
Assignments may range from ideation exercises, charrettes, studio visits, research papers, and
presentations. (Prerequisites: IDDE-102 or equivalence course and at least 3rd year standing
in IDDE-BFA.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IDDE-573 
ID Sketching Studio
A studio styled course in freehand sketching and visualization techniques using a combination
of orthogonal, perspective, empathic and any other two-dimensional means of developing and
communicating design concepts. (This class is restricted to students in IDDE-BFA.) Lecture
2, Studio 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
IDDE-599 
Industrial Design Independent Study
Industrial Design Independent Study provides students the means to study in a specialized area
with an individual faculty member. With the assistance of a their faculty advisors, Students,
will propose a course of study. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete
the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. A 3.0 or higher GPA required. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

INDE-222 
Design Issues
The course will introduce students the principles and theories of Interior Design. Topics will
include the Elements and Principles of Design, Accessibility, Human Factors, Proxemics,
Integrative Design and Evidence-Based Design. Students will complete a series of short projects related to these topics. (Prerequisites: INDE-201 and INDE-202 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
INDE-301 
Office Design
The course will introduce students to office design. Students will apply design methods and
skills for the design of an office. (This course is restricted to 3rd year students in the INDEBFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
INDE-302 
Retail Design
The course will introduce students to design for retail use; image making, merchandise lighting, and integrated graphics utilizing a scale model for study and presentation. (This course is
restricted to 3rd year students in the INDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
INDE-303 
Materials and Specifications
The course will introduce students to materials and specifications for interior design. Students
will learn how to select appropriate materials, finishes, equipment and furnishings based on
performance, codes, testing, sustainability, indoor air quality, health and safety. (This course
is restricted to 3rd year students in the INDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
INDE-304 
Building Systems
The course will introduce students to building construction materials and processes as applied
to wood, steel, concrete and masonry construction; subsystems including windows, doors,
hardware and stairs; the application of appropriate interior finishes including floor, base, wall
and ceilings, environmental control systems involving water supply, waste water treatment,
plumbing, space-heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, electrical, vertical transportation, noise
control and acoustic concerns. (This course is restricted to 3rd year students in the INDE-BFA
program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Interior Design

INDE-363 
Revit Elective
Development of CAD skills in order to represent complex spatial concepts and three-dimensional modeling techniques for architectural and interior design communication. Common
drawing conventions such as plan, elevation, and section are emphasized; however advanced
conceptualization drawings skills are covered. (Prerequisite: INDE-202 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

INDE-102 
Design Drawing I
Fundamental concepts of graphic communication conventions and skills are taught in this
course. Skill development will be both manual and computer based and range from spontaneous
free-hand sketching to formal three-dimensional computer modeling. Principles of orthographic projection, paraline drawings, and perspective will be covered. (Prerequisites: FDTN-111 or
equivalent course and enrollment in the INDE-BFA program.) Studio 6, Credits 3 (Spring)

INDE-366 
LEED Preparation
This course will introduce students to the LEED rating system and provide an overview of
LEED credits. It will help students understand the importance of designing and constructing
LEED certified buildings and will assist them in passing the LEED Green Associate examination, thereby making them more employable. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking
undergraduate students.) Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)

INDE-201 
Introduction to Interior Design
The course will introduce students to theory and methodology, of creating interior space. It
will also introduce Americans for Disability Act (ADA) accessibility requirements. The course
will provide students opportunities to apply the above to a variety of residential, business, and
retail uses. (Prerequisites: FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 and INDE-102 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall)

INDE-399 
Interior Design Part-time Coop
The Interior Design Co-op will provide students with the option to work in the Interior Design
field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Faculty sponsor approval required. Co-ops are typically paid work
experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops
must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (This course is restricted to at least 3rd
year standing in INDE-BFA.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

INDE-202 
Design Drawing II
Graphic communication skills are further developed in order to represent complex geometric
forms and space as well as architectural and interior designs. Common drawing conventions of
plan, section, and elevation are emphasized; however advanced conceptualization drawing skills
are also covered. (Prerequisites: INDE-102 or equivalent course.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
INDE-203 
Digital Graphics
This course will introduce students to and provide basic skills in digital graphics and publishing. Layout of print and web based documents will be the backbone of the course, however this
will be augmented with design and typographic principles, image acquisition, and fundamentals of bitmap and vector graphics. (Prerequisites: FDTN-122 and FDTN-132 and INDE-102
or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
INDE-207 
Color and Lighting Theory
The course will introduce students to color and lighting. Students will apply principles of light
and color to several projects. (Prerequisites: INDE-201 and INDE-202 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

INDE-401 
Multi-Story/Multi-Purpose Design
The course will introduce students to Multi-story and Multi- Purpose Design, Building, Zoning,
Proprietary and Zoning Codes, and ADA Legislation. (This course is restricted to 4th year students in the INDE-BFA program.) Lecture 1, Studio 5, Credits 4 (Fall)
INDE-402 
Special Projects
The course focuses on projects that may not typically be covered, such as real projects, community service projects or completely theoretical projects. Projects may be as short as one day
or as long as six or seven weeks and vary in scope, complexity and intensity. (This course is
restricted to 4th year students in the INDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
INDE-403 
Health Care Design
The course will introduce students to health care design. Student will work in teams to complete
a comprehensive and complex design project, based on a typical medical facility. (Past examples
include oncology centers, surgical units, and orthopedic clinics). (This course is restricted to
4th year students in the INDE-BFA program.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)

INDE-212 
Hospitality Design
The course will introduce students to Hospitality Design. Students will apply design methods and skills to the design of a restaurant or other designated hospitality design project.
(Prerequisites: INDE-201 and INDE-202 or equivalent courses.) Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

79

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

INDE-405 
Business Practices and Career Planning
This course is an introduction to professional practice with emphasis on business formation;
design marketing, legal and ethical responsibilities. It also prepares students for employment
by helping them develop career goals, job search skills, a portfolio and resume, and life-long
learning awareness. (This course is restricted to 4th year students in the INDE-BFA program.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
INDE-407 
Contract Documents
This course will introduce students to and give them a working knowledge in the contract
document phase of the design process. While the role of specifications will be presented, the
primary focus of the course will be on the production of working drawings. This focus will be
from an interior design perspective but with an understanding of how these drawings interface
with the entire set of contract documents for a building project. (This course is restricted to 4th
year students in the INDE-BFA program.) Lecture 2, Studio 4, Credits 4 (Fall)
INDE-498 
Interior Design Internship
The Interior Design Internship will provide students with the option to work in the Interior
Design field. Students may apply for internships to businesses based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete
the Internship Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from
the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
INDE-499 
Interior Design Cooperative Experience
The Interior Design Co-op will provide students with the option to work in the Interior Design
field. Students may apply for co-op employment to businesses based on the availability of positions and business job needs. Faculty sponsor approval required. Co-ops are typically paid work
experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops
must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
INDE-599 
Interior Design Independent Study
Interior Design Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty
advisor, will propose a course of study. Independent Study students must obtain permission
of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

New Media Design
NMDE-101 
New Media Design Imaging
This project-based course is an investigation of the computer as an illustrative and image
generation tool. It develops design skills in raster and vector image creation, editing, and compositing for online production. Emphasis will be on the application of visual design organization
methods to electronic media. Students will create and edit images, montages and raster-based
design solutions for online delivery. Development and reinforcement of drawing skills in the
digital environment will be explored and expanded, as well as pictorial composition and visual
aesthetics. (This course is restricted to NMDE-BFA, NWMEDID-BS Major students.) Lab 3,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMDE-102 
New Media Design Elements I
This course introduces the student to visual communication and the new media design profession. Through formal studies and perceptual understanding, including aesthetics, graphic
form and structure, concept development and visual organization methods, students will design
solutions to communication problems. Assignments exploring aspects of graphic imagery,
typography, and production will be included. (Prerequisites: NMDE-101 or equivalent course
and student standing in NMDE-BFA or NWMEDID-BS program.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits
3 (Spring)
NMDE-103 
New Media Design Interactive I
This course provides an introduction to key internet, web and multimedia technologies. Topics
covered include computer-based communication and information, basic HTML, Adobe Flash
and WYSIWYG editors, basic internet applications such as FTP, basic use of digital images,
audio and video techniques, web page design, web animation for development and publishing. (Prerequisites: NMDE-101 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA or
NWMEDID-BS program.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMDE-111 
New Media Design Digital Survey I
This project-based course is an investigation of the computer as an illustrative, imaging, and
graphical generation tool. It develops foundational design skills in raster and vector image creation, editing, compositing, layout and visual design for online production. Emphasis will be
on the application of visual design organization methods and principles for electronic media.
Students will create and edit images, graphics, layouts and typography to form effective design
solutions for online delivery. (NMDE-BFA) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

80	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NMDE-112 
New Media Design Digital Survey II
Through formal studies and perceptual understanding, including aesthetics, graphic form,
structure, concept development, visual organization methods and interaction principles, students will design graphical solutions to communication problems for static and interactive
projects. Students will focus on creating appropriate and usable design systems through the
successful application of design theory and best practices. Assignments exploring aspects of
graphic imagery, typography, usability and production for multiple digital devices and formats will be included. (Prerequisites: NMDE-111 or equivalent course and student standing
in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMDE-201 
New Media Design Elements II
Information design for static, dynamic and interactive multimedia integrates content with
visual indicators. Legibility and clear communication of information and direction is important to the success of any user interface design. This course integrates imagery, type, icons,
actions, color, visual hierarchy, and information architecture as a foundation to design successful interactive experiences. (Prerequisites: NMDE-102 or 112 or equivalent course and student
standing in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMDE-202 
New Media Design 3D
A comprehensive course in visualization that extends previous experience and skills to include
three-dimensional creation and design. The course will provide studies in 3D modeling, rendering and animation for use in virtual spaces, rich internet and mobile applications as well
as motion graphic design. Digital 3D tools will be used for solving visual design and communication problems. Students will be expected to show evidence of growth in 3D asset creation
and usage in the form of simple product renderings, interactive integration and story based
animation. (NMDE-BFA) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMDE-203 
New Media Design Interactive II
This course extends previous interactive design and development experience and skills to
emphasize interactive design principles and development. The emphasis in this course will be
on the creative process of planning and implementing an interactive project across multiple
platforms. Students will concentrate on information architecture, interactive design, conceptual creation, digital assets, visual design and programming for interactions. (Prerequisites:
NMDE-103 or ISTE-140 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA program.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMDE-204 
New Media Design Animation
This project-based course provides training and practical experience in producing two- and
three-dimensional animated sequences using off the shelf multimedia software. Students produce a number of short exercises incorporating original computer and non-digital artwork.
Topics include key frame and tweening, cycling, acceleration, squash and stretch, backgrounds,
inking, rotoscoping, sound, masking, multi-plane effects and space-to-time. Screenings of
professionally made films will illustrate and provide historical perspective. (Prerequisites:
FDTN-141 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture
2, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMDE-301 
New Media Design Elements III
This course focuses on advanced visual communication within the current new media design
profession. Through formal studies and perceptual understanding, including aesthetics, graphic form and structure, concept development and visual organization methods, students will
design sophisticated solutions to communication problems. This course integrates imagery,
typography, icons, user interface design, content creation and information architecture in
order to design successful static, motion and interactive experiences. (Prerequisites: NMDE201 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture 2,
Credits 3 (Spring)
NMDE-302 
New Media Design Graphical User Interface
This course examines the user-centered and iterative design approaches to application and
interactive development with a focus on interface design, testing and development across
multiple devices. Students will research and investigate human factors, visual metaphors and
prototype development to create effective and cutting edge user interfaces. (Prerequisites:
NMDE-203 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture
2, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMDE-303 
New Media Design Interactive III
A study of the application of information design theory and practice to the developing area of
New Media. Cartography and iconography will be viewed in the context of web and kiosk use.
The delivery of consumer information, using interactive and dynamic media as the vehicle,
will be investigated. (Prerequisites: NMDE-302 or equivalent course and student standing in
NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

NMDE-305 
New Media Design Motion Graphics
This course will deal with design concepts related to moving type. The impact of type as it
moves, rotates, explodes, scales and fades will be considered. Legibility of the message will be
studied in relation to delivery methods. Additional compositing, three-dimensional, camera
tracking and special techniques and effects will be introduced during the class. (Prerequisites:
NMDE-204 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture
2, Credits 3 (Fall)

NMDE-498 
New Media Design Internship
The New Media Design internship will provide students with the option to work in the new
media or visual communications field. Students may apply for internships to businesses based
on the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of
an instructor and complete the Internship Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

NMDE-375 
New Media Design Digital Painting
Digital Painting is a project-based course that develops image generation and compositional
skills, using raster software in combination with traditional media. This course expands on
fundamental art and design principals in the digital arena, as well as building on the use of
editing and image generation tools and creative skills. Students will generate and edit a variety
of applicable subjects from humans to robots, cityscapes and natural environments, weather
effects, montages through the use of data as a medium for visual solutions. Styles covered will
vary from speed painting to a more traditional impressionistic style, setting up custom brushes
and technical and time saving techniques. (Prerequisites: FDTN-112 or equivalent course and
at least 3rd year student standing in NMDE-BFA.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

NMDE-499 
New Media Design Co-op
At least one cooperative or internship experience is suggested for all new media design students
prior to graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience in their field
and are generally completed between their third and fourth academic years. The RIT Office
of Cooperative Education and Career Services assist students in identifying co-op placements
and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

NMDE-399 
New Media Design Part-time Coop
At least one cooperative or internship experience is suggested for all new media design students
prior to graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience in their field
and are generally completed between their third and fourth academic years. The RIT Office
of Cooperative Education and Career Services assist students in identifying co-op placements
and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (1015 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring,
summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
NMDE-401 
New Media Career Skills
The first part of the course centers on resume development, job searches, interviewing practices and online portfolio generation. The second segment focuses on the business and practices
within the new media industry. This will encompass an overview of the designer/developer/
client relationships, contracts, estimating, invoicing as well as rights and ethics. The third segment will focus on project workflows and management, team building and concept generation.
(NMDE-BFA 4YR or NWMEDID-BS 3+) Lab 4, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMDE-404 
New Media Design Interactive IV
Students will create innovative interactive product promotions and installations. The projects created in the class will embrace new technolgy and will focus on innovative solutions
for real world design problems. An emphasis will be placed on researching new technology
and using it in conjunction with solid interactive design skills to create innovative projects.
(Prerequisites: NMDE-303 or equivalent course and student standing in NMDE-BFA program.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMDE-406 
New Media Design Experimental
This project-based course affords the student the ability to apply an experimental approach to
integrating digitally generated content with new media techniques and processes in new, imaginative ways. Students will be encouraged to approach the computer as a medium of creativity
to explore issues of narrative, identity, place, and visual reality vs. digital reality. Students will
exhibit completed projects in a virtual or public forum. This course is topic based and can be
taken multiple times for credit. Specific topics can only be taken once. The topics will include
advanced concepts in 3D, UX, digital art and interaction design. (Prerequisite: This course is
restricted to students in NMDE-BFA program.Co-requisite: NMDE-404 or equivalent course.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMDE-408 
New Media Design Virtual Entertainment
This course extends previous interactive design and development experience and skills to
emphasize interactive design principles and development. The emphasis in this course will be
on the creative use of programming to create experimental interfaces, installations and physical computing projects. (Prerequisites: NMDE-404 or equivalent course and student standing
in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab 3, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMDE-411 
New Media Design Team Project
This course is designed to engage the New Media major in a capstone production experience.
The instructor will form interdisciplinary student teams that will design, plan, prototype, and
implement new media projects. Student groups are required to test their product with users
and provide written feedback and analysis. (Prerequisites: NMDE-401 or equivalent course and
student standing in NMDE-BFA program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

NMDE-599 
New Media Design Independent Study
New Media Design Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a
specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty
advisor, will propose a course of study. New Media Design Independent Study students must
obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to
enroll. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

School of Film and Animation
Film and Animation/Motion Picture Science
SOFA-101 
Production I
A fundamental course in non-synchronous film production and an introduction to digital video editing. Filmmaking is presented as a means of interpretation and expression. This course
combines technical information in motion picture exposure and editing with a theoretical
and practical approach to motion picture continuity. Production is in (non-sync) format and
post-production is digital software. Students furnish film, tape and processing. (This class is
restricted to 1st and 2nd year students in FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Studio,
Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-102 
Production II
This is the second sequenced production course for freshmen film/video students pursuing a
concentration of live action production. Emphasis is on a variety of approaches to the edited
image. In addition to continuing to develop basic concepts of creating articulate film language
in short productions, this course introduces the nature and importance of the sound component
in creating cinematic works and focuses on digital workflow. An essential course for students
in the film/video curriculum who must be able to create not only images but also mature and
appropriate soundtracks for their film and video works. (Prerequisite: SOFA-101 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-103 
Introduction to Imaging and Video Systems
This course provides an introductory overview of the basic engineering and scientific principles associated with motion picture technologies. Topics covered include imaging physics,
photographic science, human vision and perception, image capture and display technologies
(both analog and digital) and digital image processing. This course is taught using both mathematical and phenomenological presentation and prepares students to proceed with more
in-depth investigation of these fields in subsequent imaging science and digital cinema courses.
Accompanying laboratory exercises provide hands-on experience with the presented concepts. (Prerequisites: MATH-171 or MATH-181 or MATH-181A or equivalent course.) Lab
3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-107 
Principles of Animation
This course will introduce the concepts and mechanics of movement for animation, focusing
on, but not limited to, character based movement. Animation principles will be introduced and
applied using hand-drawn methods, which will serve as the foundation for their application in
any desired medium. Weekly exercises will be recorded using standard animation software, and
will be reviewed, discussed and open to group critique. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to 1st and 2nd year students in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS who have completed SOFA-121
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

81

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

SOFA-108 
Drawing for Animation
This course focuses on the mechanics of motion as applied to animated characters, both human
and non-human. Working directly from a live model, costumed and nude, and also employing
visualization techniques, students will apply figure-drawing skills along with gesture drawing, focusing on the correct representation of weight, energy and force in sequential poses.
Specific attention is paid to improving drawing skills in order to create stronger storytelling poses for animated properties. A variety of drawn animation examples will be screened
in class. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 1st and 2nd year students in FILMAN-BFA
or DIGCIME-BS who have completed SOFA-121 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Spring)
SOFA-111 
Film Viewings
Film Viewings is a film screenings meeting, showing central works from the history of cinema which are shown in support of the lectures for all first year students in the School of Film
and Animation. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 1-2 year level students in FILMANBFA or DIGCIME-BS.Co-requisite: SOFA-106 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)
SOFA-112 
Fundamentals of Screenwriting
This course introduces students to the forms and techniques of writing for visual media, particularly the short film. Throughout the course, students develop resources for finding stories
and concepts that can be turned into films. Students are responsible for writing a short script
of their own choosing and for completing several brief written exercises in areas such as personal storytelling, character development, dialogue, and plot. Scripts written in this class can
be used as the basis for films produced in other classes. (This class is restricted to 1st and 2nd
year students in FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-121 
Animation Survey
This class is intended to introduce the student to the gamut of animation thinking and making through classroom instruction and hands-on practical experience. Lecture and readings
will emphasize the history, theory and practice of animated filmmaking with extensive film
screenings to illustrate each technique and related aesthetics. Hands-on supervised studio sessions will guide students to an intuitive understanding of the principles of animation language
and students will use their understanding of form to interpret and critique various animated
works. Each student will develop their personal vision through assigned projects utilizing the
material discussed in class. Fall term restricted to Film and Animation majors; Spring term
students may take as an General Education Elective. (This class is restricted to 1st and 2nd
year students in FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-122 
Fundamentals of Computers and Imaging Technology
This course provides an introductory overview to computer systems and to principles associated with motion picture technologies. Topics covered include computer history, basics in
computer architecture basics, operating systems, HTML and networking. Human vision and
perception, image capture and display technologies (both analog and digital), digital image
processing and post-production equipment and software are also covered. The course focuses on exposing the students to basic principles necessary to proceed with subsequent courses
with production or animation focus. (This class is restricted to 1st and 2nd year students in
FILMAN-BFA.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-127 
Digital Filmmaking
Digital video is currently used in many fields. This course teaches basic digital filmmaking
skills (camera, editing, and sound) with an emphasis on storytelling skills using motion media.
Students will work in small groups shooting and editing various projects in fiction, documentary, and experimental genres. Non-majors will be required to pay a facilities fee. (This course
is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-165 
Audio Intro for Media
Determine successful ways to capture audio and distribute for a variety of media formats.
Develop listening and technical skills to manipulate audio for acceptable subjective qualities and meet technical standards. Each student will manipulate different forms of audio and
summarize the decisions to accomplish final project. ) (This course is available to RIT degreeseeking undergraduate students.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Summer)
SOFA-202 
Production Processes
This course is an introduction to all aspects of professional film/video narrative production.
Students produce short projects while learning basic shooting and crewing procedures, studio
protocol, equipment handling and maintenance, and basic sync editing. (Prerequisites: SOFA102 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-205 
Basic Sound Recording
This course provides specialized knowledge and work in sound to allow the student to be able to
distinguish and evaluate proper sound techniques and productions to encourage the beginning
of professional work in the sound industry. Each student records audio and prepares a mixed
soundtrack to professional quality standards. (Prerequisite: SOFA-101 or equivalent course
and restricted to students with at least 2nd year standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS
programs.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

82	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

SOFA-206 Directing
A course in basic directorial techniques with emphasis on the special problems peculiar to film
and video production. The class is taught in conjunction with SOFA-207 Acting for Film and
Video. Class meetings are organized around the presentation of scenes prepared by student
directors (Prerequisites: SOFA-102 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing
in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-207 
Acting for Film and Video
A course in basic acting technique with emphasis on the special problems peculiar to film and
video production. The class is taught in conjunction with SOFA-206 Directing the Actor. Class
meetings are organized around the presentation of scenes prepared by student actors and directors. (FILMAN-BFA, DIGCIME-BS) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-208 
Dramatic Structure
This course explores the theories of dramatic structure from Aristotle to the present and applies
these theories to current and classic dramatic works. The class also explores dramatic script
structure as it is used in dramatic works on stage and screen. (Prerequisites: SOFA-112 or
equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.
SOFA-102 &FILMAN/DIGCIME 2-4YR) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-209 
Object and Character Creation
Students create models for animation in three-dimensional software. Students learn various
modeling, texturing, and lighting techniques that apply to animation and digital cinematography. Students model, texture and light three-dimensional environments. (Prerequisites:
SOFA-121 or equivalent course and 1st and 2nd year students in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIMEBS.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-211 
Documentary Workshop
This course teaches students how to make a short documentary film. Each student will direct a
short film on a subject that they choose. Students will learn how to develop and create pre-production for a documentary film including contacting possible subjects, research, and proposal
writing. During the production phase of the film, students will learn how to direct a documentary crew, interviewing skills, and how to work with their subjects. During post production
students will learn how to organize their material into a short, 10-18 minute film. Students must
screen their completed film at the School of Film and Animation final screenings. Students can
retake this course as SOFA elective credit once they have completed either Fiction Workshop or
Radical Cinema Workshop. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year
student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Spring)
SOFA-212 
Fiction Workshop
In this class students direct short fiction projects using either film or digital media, applying
tools learned in earlier craft courses. Students also serve on the production crew for other projects. Students specializing in a cinematic craft work in important creative capacities on two or
more projects. Students are encouraged to explore individual styles and concepts. Intensive
pre-production protocol and documentation are followed. Editing and sound design will be
completed as well. Students complete projects for presentation at the school screenings at the
end of the quarter.Students can retake this course as SOFA elective credit once they have completed either Documentary Workshop or Radical Cinema Workshop. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202
or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS
programs.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-213 
Radical Cinema Workshop
In this course, students produce at least one major artistic work that uses the moving image.
This course demands the use of alternative expressions in concept, style, or technology, and
students are encouraged to take risks, break "rules" and explore their own unique creative potential. Students may work in a variety of media, depending on their proficiencies and the vision
of their project. Students from film and animation, fine arts, photography, performance arts,
installation, crafts, music, multimedia, gaming, computer sciences, and other relevant disciplines are typically welcomed. Students complete projects for presentation at the SOFA public
screenings. Students can retake this course as SOFA elective credit once they have completed
either Fiction Workshop or Documentary Workshop. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202 or equivalent
course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS programs.)
Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-215 
3D Animation I
This course is an introduction to three-dimensional computer animation and character rigging.
The basic principles of animation will be addressed in relation to three-dimensional animation. Character rigging techniques will be presented and will include skeletons and animation
controls. Students will produce a series of short three-dimensional computer animations and
some basic character rigs. Students will become familiar with a variety of three-dimensional
computer animation techniques. (Prerequisites: SOFA-107 or equivalent course and at least
2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

SOFA-216 
3D Animation II
This is the second in a sequence of three-dimensional animation courses. Students will be
exposed to the mechanics of motion within a character. Complete character rigging techniques
will be discussed and demonstrated. Students will produce a series of short three-dimensional
computer animations using a pre-rigged character. Students will also create a complete character model and rig of their own design. Students will gain further knowledge of a variety of
three-dimensional computer animation techniques. (Prerequisites: SOFA-215 or equivalent
course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture/
Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-218 
Concept and Character Design
This course will introduce students to the basics of design as applied to characters and environments for animated productions. Students will create and develop a “cast” of characters for an
imagined property, focusing on group dynamics, visual appeal and personality development.
Line, color, texture, shape, form and story will be referenced when developing characters.
Students will institute a process of visual development through a variety of exercises, working toward a final, finished group of characters. Strong attention and development will be
paid to color, composition, and atmosphere. Projects require a high level of drawing skill and
knowledge of perspective, as well as story and character development. Projects will utilize
hand drawn, digital painting, live action and subjective techniques. A variety of exercises will
cover tone, mood, deep and shallow space, multi-plane movement, and natural and imagined
spaces. (Prerequisites: SOFA-203 or equivalent course and least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-224 
Tradigital Animation
The computer has become an integral part of modern animation production. This course will
introduce the student to this technology and aid them in incorporating it into their personal
skill set. The focus will be on adapting traditional techniques learned in Animation Survey
to the digital production environment. The student will work with professional level animation software using both raster and vector graphics to produce several short exercises adapted
from traditional techniques that will develop the skills needed to efficiently and effectively
use two-dimensional digital tools in their own work. (Prerequisites: SOFA-107 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab,
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-225 
Performance Resources for Animation
This course will give animators and other students an opportunity to explore a visual language
of acting and posing that will help their storytelling abilities. Acting, timing and pacing are
critical elements to any successful character animated film. Identifying and building a library
of expressions, poses, and movement for emotional and visual expression is the goal for each
student. Students will study reference material from successful silent and animated films.
They will also create their own reference material through acting and filming themselves and
other students. The visual references will be scrutinized on a frame-by-frame basis for a deeper understanding of this visual language. The class will include demonstrations and exercises
for the students. (Prerequisites: SOFA-107 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student
standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-227 
Animation Pre-Production
Students collect and produce short film ideas and learn to express them in a variety of methods. Short film scripts will be written in a workshop setting and shared with class in critiques.
Students will learn how to create digital soundtracks and read digital sound. Students will
make animation bar sheets for sound/image relationships and timings and exposure sheet
design. Students will also work with storyboards scanned into the computer and manipulated
in time with sound to create an animatic as another tool for initializing animation production. (Prerequisites: SOFA-107 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-228 
Animation Scriptwriting and Storyboard
This course concentrates on the structures of temporal organization for the screen in all animated productions. Particular attention is paid to the structures of scriptwriting and the layout
of movements and visual composition via editing into storyboards. Various individual written script projects will be required of the student, leading to a final production script for an
animated film that will be fully storyboarded and formatted. Particular attention will be paid
to the visual storytelling aspects of converting a written script. Layouts from the production
will also be developed. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to 1st and 2nd year students in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS who have completed SOFA-121 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-306 
Senior Thesis Seminar
A required course for third-year SOFA students and the prerequisite for SOFA-401 Senior
Thesis I. Students discuss and generate a written plan for their senior film or animation thesis
projects, select an adviser from among the SOFA faculty, and present a proposal for approval
to a faculty committee. (Prerequisites: SOFA-211 or SOFA-212 or SOFA-213 or SOFA-317 or
equivalent course and at least 3rd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.)
Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)

	

SOFA-311 
Image Capture and Production Technology
This course offers a full investigation of image capture technologies used in contemporary
motion picture production. Historical image generation techniques will be provided as an
introduction to modern media and equipment. Fundamental characteristics of silver halide
photochemical imaging systems will be explored with emphasis on typical metrology and imaging properties. Electronic image capture will also be presented in the context of fundamental
imaging properties. Standard film and video workspaces and workflows will be examined as
a direct introduction to post-production technologies to be presented in subsequent Digital
Cinema courses. (Prerequisites: SOFA-103 and IMGS-221 and IMGS-351 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-312 
Digital Post Production Technology
This course focuses on the specific technologies of motion picture post-production and imaging
science. Motion content generated via film or electronic technologies on set are ingested into
the post-production chain utilizing various optical, opto-mechanical, and electronic systems.
Topics will include video standards, telecine transfer, digital colorspaces, digital intermediate, special effects, color correction, and image processing. Motion content mastering will
be explored as an introduction to exhibition technologies to be presented in the final Digital
Cinema course. Particular emphasis will be placed on production testing, data acquisition and
image analyses. (Prerequisites: SOFA-311 or equivalent course.) Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 3
(Spring)
SOFA-313 
Film Projection and Digital Cinema
As the final course in the digital cinema core technology sequence, this class completes the study
of motion picture technologies, focusing on exhibition and display engineering. Topics covered include traditional mechanical film projection, electronic projection and the color science
associated with image appearance. Special focus will be given to evolving exhibition standards,
image quality evaluations and emerging techniques. The course will conclude with an investigation of three-dimensional technologies and varied distribution models for motion content.
(Prerequisites: SOFA-312 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-316 
3D Animation III
This course is a continuation of SOFA-216 3D Animation II. Students examine facial expressions and learn how to create emotion in the face. Advanced rigging techniques, especially
pertaining to the faces, will be presented. Students will be presented with techniques to dissect sentences and reconstruct them in to useable connected speech for animated characters.
Students will produce a series of short three-dimensional computer animations using a prerigged character. (FILMAN-BFA, DIGCIME-BS) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-323 
2D Animation II: Performance
This course focuses on the treatment of different styles of movement using drawn animation.
Students explore the use of acceleration and deceleration, squash and stretch, maintaining
volume, anticipation, secondary action, as they relate to a variety of different performances.
Students will use and utilize a moving camera, pans, character interaction and the connectivity
of three shots that show a cohesive idea as well as advanced animation skills. Weekly assignments consist of rough pencil tests. A variety of examples of drawn animation will be screened
in class. (Prerequisites: SOFA-218 or equivalent course and student standing in FILMAN-BFA.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-363 
Intro Computational Photograph
This course provides an introduction to the field of computational photography. Students will
be exposed to the latest techniques in computational photography, the imaging fundamentals
associated with them and the potential applications in the fields of photography and motion
imaging. The course will focus on some radiometry and image processing fundamentals along
with the review of technical papers covering the latest research in the field. Programming
projects will provide students with hands-on experience related to the concepts presented.
(Prerequisites: IMGS-251 and IMGS-361 student standing in DIGCIME-BS or IMGS-BS.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-386 
Team Film: PSA Production Workshop
This course provides an opportunity to work on a short film production as a part of a team.
Students will serve multiple roles in the production depending on skills and the needs of the
team. The production will focus on an area of social change or community within the Greater
Rochester area, with the potential to work with non-profit groups directly. Productions using
varied and multiple techniques including the mix of live action with animation are encouraged. Productions techniques will be decided based on the skills of the students enrolled. The
final film will be screened for the RIT community. (Prerequisites: SOFA-317 or equivalent
course and at least 3rd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

83

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

SOFA-399 
Film and Animation Part-Time Coop
At least one cooperative or internship experience is suggested for all SOFA students prior to
graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience in their field and are generally completed between their second and fourth academic years. The RIT Office of Cooperative
Education and Career Services assist students in identifying co-op placements and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk)
or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer).
(FILMAN-BFA, DIGCIME-BS) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOFA-402 
Senior Project II
A continuation of Senior Project I, in this course students in their final year continue work on
a major student project. Students may work on projects including motion picture engineering,
image science research or relevant craft. Students are in charge of their own work, but they
work directly with an adviser to track their progress on the project. The class meets one-hour
each week to provide discussion on project progress and learning. (Prerequisites: SOFA-401 or
equivalent course and student standing in DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-406 
Senior Thesis I
Students work independently with their advisor towards completion of their capstone experience for their BFA degree. Students have a predetermined timeline and must complete all
deadlines to pass this course. (Prerequisite: SOFA-306 or equivalent course and 4th year standing in FILMAN-BFA.) Lecture, Credits 2 - 6 (Fall)
SOFA-407 
Senior Thesis II
Students work independently with their advisor towards completion of their capstone experience for their BFA degree. Students have a predetermined timeline and must complete all
deadlines of that timeline to pass this thesis course including completion and public screening
of finished work or final presentation of craft experience. (Prerequisite: SOFA-406 or equivalent
course and 4th year standing in FILMAN-BFA.) Lecture, Credits 2 - 6 (Spring)
SOFA-498 
Film and Animation Internship
Film and Animation Internship is open to all SOFA students with a minimum of a 3.0 GPA.
SOFA students should first procure an internship opportunity within our industry. Students
must submit a completed permission form identifying the firm and what they have been told
will be their duties and responsibilities. All Film and Animation Internships must be approved
by the student’s Program Director or Administrative Chair. Students are required to submit a
minimum 10-page paper about their experience and obtain a letter of review from their job site
supervisor. 90 hours of work earns one semester credit. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOFA-499 
Undergraduate Co-op
At least one cooperative or internship experience is suggested for all SOFA students prior to
graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience in their field and are generally completed between their second and fourth academic years. The RIT Office of Cooperative
Education and Career Services assist students in identifying co-op placements and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk)
or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term (fall, spring, summer).
(Prerequisites: Must have department permission to enroll. Restricted to students with at least
3rd year standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOFA-505 
Acting for Film
A course in basic acting technique with an emphasis on the requirements of film production.
Students are introduced to various approaches to acting through exercises and by performing
in scenes from professional productions. Scenes are rehearsed outside of class, and then staged
and critiqued during class time. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate
students.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-509 
Advanced Object and Character Creation
This course will continue the exciting journey into modeling. Students will learn economy of
geometry for animation. Instruction will go further into organic modeling by studying anatomy and relating it to edge loops. Students will be introduced to sculpting digital models.
(Prerequisites: SOFA-209 or equivalent course and at least 3rd year standing in FILMAN-BFA
or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-511 
Film Sound Theory: Music
This course is one of three in the study of film sound theory. Through readings, focused group
discussion, and the viewing of/listening to select films, the course promotes critical analysis
of the varied and profound uses of music in sound design. Addressed is the history of music
from the silent era to the modern score. The concepts studied include the modal changes in
point-of-audition, and positioning across diegeses. Newer topics including audio-visualization
and ventriloquism theory are also addressed. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking
undergraduate students.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)

84	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

SOFA-512 
Film Sound Theory: Effects
This course is one of three in the study of film sound theory. Through readings, focused group
discussion, and the viewing of/listening to select films, the course promotes critical analysis
of the varied and profound uses of effects in sound design. Addressed is the history of effects
from the early sound era to the modern design. The concepts studied include the modal changes in point-of-audition, and positioning across diegeses. Other topics like complementarity
and the acousmetre are also addressed. Each student gives a presentation on a chosen concept. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lecture/Lab
5, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
SOFA-513 
Film Sound Theory:Voice
This course is one of three in the study of film sound theory. Through readings, focused group
discussion, and the viewing/listening of select films, the course promotes critical analysis of
the varied and profound uses of music in sound design. The history of voice from the silent
era to the modern sound design will be addressed. The concepts studied include the modal
changes in point-of-audition, and positioning across diegeses. Other topics like the acousmetre and the mute, vococentric mixing and separation, relativizing, and dialogue theory are
also addressed. Each student gives a presentation on a chosen concept within film voice theory. (This course is available to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lecture/Lab 5,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOFA-514 
Business and Careers in Film
An introduction to all aspects of the business side of professional film/video narrative and
commercial production. Students develop a business plan to create their own production company while learning alternative careers in film, basic financial and legal protocol, and mental
preparation needed to enter the film business market. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202 or equivalent
course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS programs.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-518 
Business and Careers in Animation
This course will be geared toward the small animation business owner and individual freelance
animator. We will discuss the setting up of a small business and all of its operations. There
will be reference to bigger business entities and many of the same principles will apply to both
types of businesses. The elements of discussion will teach students how to go about approaching animation work in the industry from a small business point of view and from an individual
approach. There will be many references and sources pointed out in the classes including State,
Federal and private websites full of information on the workplace. The class will discuss the
creation of sample reels, websites, self-promotion, research and interview techniques all related
to the individual animation. Discussions of ethics and individual responsibilities will be covered. (Prerequisite: SOFA-227 or equivalent course and at least 3rd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-521 
Advanced Sound Recording
This course continues the work from SOFA-205 Basic Sound Recording to include audio synchronized or locked to picture and the use of Foley and ADR production techniques. Students
develop workflow approaches for complex multi-track mixing and signal manipulation. Each
student prepares a mixed track to professional quality standards and manages sound and video
files between various hardware and software platforms. (Prerequisite: SOFA-205 or equivalent
course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS programs.)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-522 
Stop Motion Puppet Fundamentals
This is an introductory course that will give students a basic and solid understanding of stopmotion animation. The class covers all aspects of stop-motion in its various forms but will
mainly concentrate on stop-motion puppet/character animation. There will be demonstrations on model fabrication, animation techniques and camera/grip techniques. More in-depth
topics, like latex and silicon mold making and intensive post production techniques will be
introduced. There will be opportunities for students to practice animation with specific goals
and assignments. (Prerequisites: SOFA-107 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student
standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-523 
Advanced Editing (DO NOT USE)
This course is designed to teach students the professional workflow of editing digital film
and video files. Students learn the technical craft as well as the aesthetic choices that editors
make. Students practice the editing of all genres by editing short fiction, documentary, and
experimental projects. Students will explore and learn advanced tools in Final Cut Pro editing
software while editing short projects and tutorials. Areas of study include learning a cinema
file database, media management, color correction, visual and time based effects, sound processing and track building, multi-camera editing, and titling and graphics. In the second half
of the semester, students will learn the basic operation system of AVID editing software and
complete three short projects using AVID software. (Prerequisites: SOFA-522 or equivalent
course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture/
Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

SOFA-524 
Advanced Directing
This class offers in-depth study of techniques introduced in the basic directing class, with an
additional focus on using external observation to determine appropriate behavior. This course
emphasizes the special problems peculiar to Film and Video production. Class meetings are
organized around the presentation of scenes prepared by student directors using the acting students in the class. Meets in conjunction with Advanced Acting for Film and Video. (Prerequisite:
SOFA-206 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and
DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

SOFA-542 
History and Aesthetics: Animation Stories
This course provides an in-depth study of a specific movement or individual that has made a
major contribution to the animated film art form. Films will be viewed and discussed in the
context of the specific time and places in which they were made. Emphasis is on determining
the unique characteristics of the medium and how those characteristics are used as a means
of interpretation and expression. (Prerequisite: SOFA-121 or equivalent course and at least
2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)

SOFA-525 
Advanced Acting for Film and Video
An intermediate level acting class working in depth with techniques and approaches introduced
in the basic acting class with the additional focus of using external observation to determine
appropriate behavior. Class meetings are organized around the presentation of scenes prepared
by student actors and directors. The class is taught in conjunction with Advanced Directing.
(FILMAN-BFA, DIGCIME-BS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

SOFA-543 
Targeting an Audience: Developing Content for TV
This course will introduce students to the methods and strategies used by studios and TV networks to develop content that appeals to specific audiences. The student will gain great insight
into both the business and creative aspects of developing television content. Each student will
choose a TV network to study and through a series of assignments will develop a profile of the
audience their network attracts. This information will then be used to create an appropriate
90-second film using the style and subject matter that fits the chosen network and its viewers.
(FILMAN-BFA, DIGCIME-BS YR 2-4) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

SOFA-526 
Writing the Short Film
This is a course in writing for short films. The course includes an exploration of the short
film genre and how that differs from other narrative forms. In the course, students complete
exercises to improve their ability to write scenes and develop characters. To conclude the
course, students write a short script appropriate for filming in one of the production courses (Prerequisite: SOFA-208 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-531 
Digital Effects and Compositing
This course offers hands-on experience in manipulating live action video and applying digital
effects. There is an emphasis on digital compositing using rotoscoping, image tracking, alpha
channels and transparency. Composites may be accomplished through green screen shooting,
transfer modes, masks, and/or traveling mattes. Node based compositing will also be addressed
as well. (Prerequisite: SOFA-122 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-532 
Underwater Cinematography
This course is designed to prepare students to professionally complete cinematography assignments in an underwater environment. To accomplish this, the student will complete basic
scuba diving training and achieve scuba diving certification. The student will become familiar
with underwater video camera housings and accessories and basic underwater shooting techniques. ** Fee -- There is a facility fee that covers all equipment, off campus facility use, texts
and insurance** (Prerequisite: SOFA-202 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student
standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-533 
Advanced Stop Motion Techniques
This course will introduce stop motion students to more advanced techniques of single frame
production. The class will be divided into teams that will execute a finished short film complete with post and sound work. Although these finished films will be short and simple they
will expose the students to stop motion set and puppet building, lighting, grip work, camera movement and post work. This class builds on the fundamentals that were taught in the
Fundamentals class and advances the student in their understanding of stop motion production.
The team members will specialize in certain areas of building, camera work, animation and post
work and will contribute to the team film until the completion of that project. (Prerequisites:
SOFA-522 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or
DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-536 
30-Second Commercial Production
An introduction into the world of producing television commercials. Students learn the
workflow between advertising agencies, their clients and production companies. They also
execute the production of a television commercial from conception to editorial. (Prerequisites:
SOFA-102 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or
DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-541 
History and Aesthetics of Animation
This course will provide a general survey of the development of animated film making around
the world from the late 19th century to today. It will be an exploration of the history and aesthetics of animation with an emphasis on the unique characteristics of the animated art form and
how those characteristics are used as a means of interpretation and expression. (Prerequisite:
SOFA-121 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and
DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

SOFA-558 
Film Production Management
Film Production Management deals with the business and logistics side of filmmaking,
especially long form fiction narrative. Students will learn the workflow and organizational
imperatives to complete a project that typically requires many people and large sums of money. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-562 
International Film History
This course examines selected, varying film topics in a wider socio-historical context. Seminar
themes change each year and may include topics such as post-war German film, films of the
Holocaust, Japanese film, surrealist and magic realist film, Soviet film, Native Americans on
film, etc. Students are expected to participate actively in the course discussions. (Prerequisite:
SOFA-106 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and
DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-563 
Writing the Feature
This course is an exploration of the feature film form. Students propose ideas for a feature length
film and, in consultation with the instructor and other students, write a detailed step outline
and a substantial portion of the first draft. (Prerequisite: SOFA-208 or equivalent course and
at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-564 
Writing the Series
This course is an introduction to all forms of series writing for television and the Internet.
Students will choose to write either a one-hour pilot for a dramatic series, or a half-hour pilot
and an additional episode for a single-camera comedy series. All students will develop and
write a series “bible,” a thorough description of all the characters and the world in which the
series takes place as well as how the series may develop with future plotlines. (Prerequisite:
SOFA-208 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA and
DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-567 
Digital Color Correction
This course offers project-based hands-on color correction with both daVinci hardware and
Adobe, daVinci and Assimilate software. Introduction to basic color correction techniques and
common tools in the industry will be provided. The course will progress from technical equipment setups and calibration to simple primary color correction to advanced secondary and
color separation methods. Through assigned projects, students will be taught how to use tone
and color to augment theatrical storytelling and add a dimension of professional finish to their
films. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS programs.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-568 
Digital Color Management
This course offers a comprehensive study of the methods and techniques used to manage and
interchange color in digital color-imaging systems. The principles of colorimetry and densitometry will be reviewed and applied specifically to practical color imaging applications.
The fundamental colorimetric properties of color imaging media, devices and systems will be
explored and compared. Digital color encoding principles will be examined, and the features
and limitations of various digital color encoding methods will be described. Course topics will
be discussed in terms of their application in commercial color-managed systems, such as the
ICC and AMPAS ACES systems. (Prerequisites: IMGS-351 or equivalent course and minimum
of 3rd year student standing in DIGCIME-BS, IMGS-BS, IMPT-BS or PHIMTEC-BS.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

85

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

SOFA-571 
Advanced Production Immersion
This workshop provides students with the opportunity to learn more about a particular area
of production — editing, cinematography, lighting, sound, etc. — with an industry professional. Different topics may be taken in the same semester. Topics may only be taken once.
(Prerequisites: SOFA-102 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in
FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-572 
Mixing and Sound Design
Continue the work from Advanced Sound Recording by mixing multi-track sessions with video
to post-produce several different projects to professional standards. Learn how to listen and
develop a trained ear while understanding proper equalization and use of effects and digital
signal routing. Sessions can include documentaries, dialog and musical productions. Create
templates and develop editing/mixing techniques to balance creativity and time constraints of
a typical project. (Prerequisites: SOFA-521 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student
standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOFA-573 
Fusion Production
In this course, students learn to combine various media including live action, two-dimensional animation, and/or three-dimensional animation. Projects include camera matching and
compositing. Students match the lighting, blur, color, contrast and perspective across composited media. Students will have characters and objects interacting across different media.
Students from a variety of disciplines may contribute their expertise to the group projects
from disciplines like music composition, theater and acting, and other arts and related studies.
(Prerequisites: SOFA-215 or SOFA-216 or SOFA-533 or SOFA-202 or equivalent course and
at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)
SOFA-574 
Documentary Field Production
Students in this course will work in small documentary crews of 3-4, shooting weekly assignments in the field. We will shoot digital HD format in these group projects. Emphasis will be
on developing a shooting intuition, gathering clean sound, shooting to edit, and interviewing
skills. We will also shoot one project using multiple cameras. We will examine different creative approaches to reality subjects and test possible techniques such as incorporating fiction
techniques. Students will be expected to edit the projects they direct into short 3-4 minute films
for class critiques. (Prerequisites: SOFA-102 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student
standing in FILMAN-BFA.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-575 
3D Lighting and Rendering
In this course, students learn to use lighting in three-dimensional software. Projects include
modeling, texturing, and lighting of objects, characters and spaces. Students match photographic images and three-dimensional objects in lighting, blur, color, contrast and perspective.
Students imitate photorealism by combining shadows, textures, direct lighting, indirect
lighting, reflections, and refractions. Students use a variety of rendering programs to create
composites. (Prerequisite: SOFA-216 or equivalent course and student standing in the FILMANBFA program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-578 
Advanced Cinematography
In this course students explore the world of cinematography and lighting and how they relate to
each other. Students participate in weekly hands-on exercises to develop and improve cinematic
storytelling through composition, framing and lighting techniques. (Prerequisite: SOFA-202
or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS
programs.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-581 
Particles and Dynamics
This course gives students the skills to insert three-dimensional computer special effects into
animation and live action footage. Students explore three-dimensional computer particle animation and dynamics simulation. Students will create short animations to simulate fire, rain,
smoke, lighting, water and other dynamics-based collisions. (Prerequisites: SOFA-215 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab,
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOFA-583 
Building the 3D Character
This course covers a broad range of three-dimensional animation related topics in a detailoriented manner. The various topics will be anchored in the design and development of an
original three-dimensional character. Topics covered will include, but are not limited to, modeling, rigging, texturing, and lighting. Students will design and build a 3D character of their
own design. Using a variety of 3D techniques, students will create a fully articulated character
rig, and produce a short animation demonstrating its functionality, as well as their proficiency
in techniques such as lighting, texturing, and rendering. (Prerequisites: SOFA-209 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab 4,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)

86	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

SOFA-586 
Programming for 3D Animators
This programming course is designed specifically for artists and animators with little or no
programming experience. It is designed to give students the ability to solve software problems
by making their own tools or finding existing tools. All of the assignments and examples in
class are graphics related and will include tools for animation, rigging, particles, texturing and
modeling. (Prerequisites: SOFA-215 or equivalent course and at least 2nd year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-587 
Digital Sculpting
This course is designed to provide students with an in-depth instruction on organic and hard
surface modeling using digital sculpting. Students will discover surface texturing to give a
realistic clay look. Techniques for cutting and building surfaces to create both rigid and soft
surfaces will be provided. Students will texture surfaces using photographic references and
hand painting in software. (Prerequisites: SOFA-209 or equivalent course and at least 2nd
year student standing in FILMAN-BFA or DIGCIME-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOFA-590 
Los Angeles Behind the Scenes
An exploration of both the entertainment industry, through its interconnected parts, and the
sprawling city of Los Angeles. Students begin and end at RIT and, in-between, travel to Los
Angeles for a behind-the-scenes look focused on either film or animation. (FILMAN-BFA,
DIGCIME-BS) Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Int)
SOFA-599 
SOFA Independent Study
SOFA Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area
with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor, should
propose a course ofstudy or project with clearly defined deliverables. Students must obtain
permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll.
Student must have a minimum of a 3.0 GPA to apply. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

School of Media Sciences
Media Arts and Technology
MAAT-010 
Co-op Orientation
This course provides students with a venue for preparing for both the search and for employment. Students learn how to access the job search database, to prepare cover letters and
resumes, to make effective use of career fairs, and to participate in effective interviews through
a mock interview process. (NMEP-BS) Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
MAAT-101 Foundations
This course introduces students to the graphic media industries by studying the history, culture, technology, markets and workers. The course provides an orientation to the production
concepts, working environments, hardware and software tools, languages, working standards
and cultures of the industry. (This course is restricted to students in the NMEP-BS or VISMEDBFA programs and the PRNTMED-MN minor.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-106 
Typography and Page Design
The course provides an introduction to the theoretical and practical foundations of typography and page design. Students will study the history, aesthetics, and technology of typography.
Projects will include design and production methods, using current software tools and fonts
for typography in print and screen display. Students will apply their acquired knowledge to
make informed decisions in the practice of typography. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or MAAT383 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-107 Imaging
This course addresses the skills and competencies necessary to create, manage and edit digital images. This course introduces students to digital hardware, software, and terminology
and addresses the process from acquisition, to manipulation and output of raster images.
(Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or MAAT-383 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-206 
Print and Production Workflow
Students will learn industry best practices for print publishing applications. Students will prepare content to be printed across a variety of printing platforms. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or
MAAT-383 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-246 
Magazine Publishing
This class is an introduction to the concepts and methods of magazine design and production
workflow, with the practical experience of producing a cross-media magazine for output to a
digital device and print. Special attention is given to the use of images in integration with text,
grids, and the role of experimentation and innovation in the modern magazine. (Prerequisites:
MAAT-106 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

MAAT-256 
Principles of Printing
This course surveys the materials and processes used in print reproduction. Students will
learn the basic theory of image reproduction embodied in the analog and digital printing processes, and learn to identify the process origins of print samples. Additionally, students will be
introduced to material science as it relates to print. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or equivalent
course and student standing in NMEP-BS or PACK-BS or 2nd year standing in JOURNALBS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-266 
Advanced Workflow
This advanced course focuses on analysis of workflow efficiencies, process automation, and
process optimization with a focus on relevant applications for publishing, promotional, and
packaging production workflows. Students will gain direct experience with advanced workflow tools through immersive project work. (Prerequisites: MAAT-206 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-271 
Webpage Production I
Students in this course will plan and implement publishing projects with a focus on usability,
accessibility, and information design for the World Wide Web. Application of standard Web
protocols such as HTML and CSS will be applied in the context of Web publishing as a part of
a cross-media production strategy. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-272 
Webpage Production II
In this advanced course, students will apply concepts and skills from previous study to determine optimal strategies for the development, deployment and evaluation of websites. Through
a blend of research and practical application, students will evaluate and apply a range of methodologies for Web publishing. (Prerequisites: MAAT-271 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-301 
Database Publishing
The course introduces the fundamental design elements of databases constructed for the activities that support the publishing process. Topics include the process of building databases
comprised of information and digital assets needed to compose publications and to create and
distribute personalized documents through the web and in print. (Prerequisites: MAAT-106
and MAAT-271 or equivalent courses.Co-requisite: MAAT-272 or equivalent course.) Lab 3,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-302 
Professional and Technical Writing
This course prepares a student to engage in a variety of written and oral communications necessary in academic and business environments. Students are expected to produce appropriate
audience-centered written materials that achieve a desired purpose based on techniques, organization, format, and style. A formal technical report and presentation are required. Students
must pass this course with a grade of B or higher prior to graduation or pass the Writing
Competency Test. (NMEP-BS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

MAAT-359 
Media Distribution and Transmission
In this course students gain extensive knowledge of the various methods and techniques used to
electronically and physically distribute information. Students will also study planning, scheduling, inventory management and customer fulfillment. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or equivalent
course and student standing in the NMEP-BS program.) Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-363 
Media Industries Analysis
This course examines the major industries closely allied with the printing industry: advertising,
publishing, and packaging. The intent is to give students in-depth knowledge of (1) the structure of each of these industries; (2) the channels and methods through which and by which each
distributes its products and services; and (3) the major customers/clients of its products and
services. Particular attention will be devoted to investigating the business models for the use
of print to create value in advertising, publishing, and packaging. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or
equivalent course and student standing in the NMEP-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-364 
Digital News Systems Management
This course examines the evolving forms and functions of news media publishing. The focus
is on the intersections of various systems necessary for contemporary news publishing: information technology, content management, audience assessment, human resource management
and product delivery. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or equivalent course and student standing in
NMEP-BS or 2nd year standing in JOURNAL-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-366 
Introduction to Book Design
Introduces the history, aesthetics, and technology of book design, with emphasis digital methods and digital print production. Projects include page design, typographic investigation,
legibility study, and production of both print and electronic books. Research in the RIT Cary
Collection and hands-on work in multiple production labs will inform and enable student projects. (Prerequisites: MAAT-106 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-367 
Image Processing Workflow
This course concentrates on the image processing variables and techniques required for producing high-quality color reproductions for a variety of output technologies. Emphasis will
be placed on optimizing both image quality and workflow efficiencies from digital capture to
final output. Topics include file formats, image processing strategies, color conversion and
effective proofing techniques. (Prerequisites: MAAT-107 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-368 
Gravure and Flexography
Students who take this course will learn how the world’s leading package printing technologies
work, and how to create designs that print well on them. Classroom theory is complemented by
labs that give students extensive hands on experience operating a flexo label press. At the end
of the course, students create pressure sensitive (peel and stick) label designs, take command
of a flexo press, and print their labels on it. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

MAAT-306 
Cross Media Publishing
In the course the students will research current and emerging publishing information technology trends and apply them in creating publishing solutions across a variety of platforms.
Students will learn and apply digital asset management methods and practices. (Prerequisites:
MAAT-272 or ISTE-105 or equivalent courses or 2nd year standing in JOURNAL-BS.) Lab 2,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

MAAT-369 Bookbinding
The growing interest in digital printing processes has created a desire to bind small editions
and single copies of books. This course is an introduction to the many different hand-binding
options ranging from single-section pamphlets to hardcover books. The materials and techniques learned are applicable to the finishing of on-demand publications as well as creating
one-of-a-kind presentations. (NMEP-BS) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

MAAT-307 
Media Business Basics
This course introduces principles in core business areas, such as management, finance, accounting, operations, and marketing, which are key factors in developing, growing, and operating a
media venture. Students bring these strategic areas together in developing a 12-part business
plan. (NMEP-BS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

MAAT-371 
Print Finishing Management
This course explains and demonstrates why planning for successful print finishing requires
in-depth knowledge of production, from design planning through prepress, print, bindery,
and distribution operations. Emphasis is placed on cost-effective planning, management, and
control in a contemporary print-finishing environment. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or equivalent course and student standing in one of the following programs NMEP-BS, VISMED-BFA,
GRDE-BFA or PACK-BS.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Spring)

MAAT-355 
Media Law
Multimedia Law offers an opportunity to investigate the philosophical and constitutional foundations of free expression as it relates to speech, writing, image making and publishing. First
Amendment principles will be studied with respect to personal protection boundaries. The
course will provide a survey covering defamation issues. Students should be able to form educated opinions about libel and slander boundaries. Since the publication discipline involves
the creation of original work, a study of copyright, patent and trademark law will be provided. (This course is restricted to students in the NMEP-BS or VISMED-BFA programs and the
PRNTMED-MN minor.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MAAT-356 
Multimedia Strategies
This course is designed to explore all of the available mass media and customized communications technology options for effectively reaching consumers. It will explore marketing across
multiple channels, focusing primarily on interactive marketing channels. The emphasis will
be on development of the right mix of marketing communications techniques. (Prerequisites:
MAAT-101 or MAAT-256 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

MAAT-376 
Lithographic Process
This course provides detailed fundamentals of the equipment and materials used in the lithographic process. Topics include press, inks, substrates, and pressroom management. There
is an emphasis on process color printing and problem solving press and process variables
that impact quality and productivity. (Prerequisites: MAAT-206 or equivalent course.) Lab,
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-377 
Advanced Retouching and Restoration
This class demystifies the process for digitally enhancing, retouching, and restoring images in
industry standard raster software. This class is designed for students who have a solid working knowledge of current industry standard raster software and are interested in advancing
their skills in digital image enhancement retouching and restoration. This course includes
image acquisition and specialized image manipulation techniques used to retouch, reconstruct, restore, and enhance images. (Prerequisites: MAAT-107 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

87

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

MAAT-383 
Design Production
This introductory course provides students with the fundamental understanding of the key
variables, systems and phases of production workflow. Emphasis will be placed on job planning,
implementation strategies and decision-making processes for print and e-media production
workflow. Projects will allow students to optimize their work for specific production requirements as well as to optimize content and workflow strategies for cross-media applications.
(GRDE-BFA) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-386 
3D Printing Workflow
This course introduces students to the core technologies, applications and production processes
of three-dimensional printing. Through the coursework, students will apply their knowledge
in hands-on project work that will allow them to produce 3D objects of their own design.
(This class is restricted to students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits
3 (Spring)
MAAT-401 
Team Project
This course is designed to engage the students in a capstone production experience. Students
will work in teams and interact with selected clients to design, complete and budget a multimedia project. (Prerequisites: MAAT-307 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-498 
Media Arts and Technology Internship
The Media Arts & Technology Internship provides students an opportunity to enhance their
academic study through professional experience. Students must obtain permission of instructor
and complete the Internship Permission to enroll. No more than six (6) credits of internship can
be applied toward the degree. (NMEP-BS YR 2-4) INT, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MAAT-499 
Media Arts and Technology Co-op
The Media Arts and Technology Co-op provides students with the opportunity to work in a
position related to their major field of study. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can
be either part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops should fall within
an RIT term (fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MAAT-503 
Operations Management in the Graphic Arts
An in-depth study of the factors affecting the efficiencies and effectiveness of print media organizations and ultimately their profitability. Includes consideration of both internal factors,
such as quality level goals, training, scheduling, plant layout, and financial management, and
external factors, such as environmental and legal issues and safety enforcement. (Prerequisites:
MAAT-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-541 
Digital Print Processes
Students who take this course will understand how digital printing technologies work, what
they are capable of doing, and how these technologies are used commercially. Students will
analyze the factors driving the explosive growth of digital printing, including how the economics of digital and conventional printing compare. The concepts taught in the classroom will be
reinforced through hands-on labs and field trips to digital printers and equipment suppliers.
(Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-543 
Limited Edition Print
Through immersive study of technologies, materials, and business models, students will learn
how to produce high quality limited editions of original works and reproductions for fine art
and other markets. Students will also explore the integration of print technologies (e.g. inkjet,
letterpress, screen, etc.) and materials with an emphasis on print finishing, authentication, and
archival concerns. (Prerequisites: MAAT-101 or MAAT-383 with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-544 
Color Management Systems
This course addresses the science and technology of color management systems in achieving
quality color reproduction and scanner-monitor and proof-print agreement. Students will study
the role of color measurement for device calibration, device characterization, and building an
ICC-based color management system. Students will perform color image rendering from digital
capture to print, investigate digital proofing and soft and remote proofing, and evaluate color
management system performance. Process control tools and analysis of control targets will also
be covered. (Prerequisites: MAAT-107 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-550 
Topics in Media Arts, Sciences and Technology
Topics in Media Arts, Sciences and Technology provides a platform for students to explore
the most contemporary issues in the rapidly evolving fields of media arts, media sciences and
media technologies. The content taught in this course will change frequently and the course
may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

88	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MAAT-558 
Package Printing
Students who take this course will understand how package printing technologies work, and
how they are used to print bags, labels, cartons, cans, boxes, and bottles. Students will apply
a packaging printing workflow to produce labels and folding cartons of their own design.
Finally, students will analyze the cost of printing a package. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-563 
Estimating Practice
This course examines the use of estimating practices and the development of production
standards, and all-inclusive costs for both print and electronic media jobs. It includes consideration of the most cost-effective production sequence. (Prerequisites: MAAT-307 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-566 
Typography Research
The course builds on fundamentals and skills taught in introductory and advanced typography courses by developing methods of investigation, research, and analysis, with the goal of
enabling students to conduct independent research. Students choose individual typographic
topics to research (e.g. technology, psychology, history, aesthetics, imaging, writing systems,
culture, and society). Course lectures survey these topics. Students each give presentations on
their topics and prepare a written a report. The course emphasizes individual initiative and
seminar participation. To enroll in this course students’ need to have successfully completed
two additional typography classes. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-571 
Digital Asset Management
This advanced course focuses on the development and application of digital asset management
strategies for cross media production workflows. Project work will include the development of
asset management strategies and the utilization of a blend of desktop and enterprise-level DAM
tools and systems. (Prerequisites: MAAT-306 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MAAT-573 
Transmedia Publishing and Storytelling
Transmedia publishing is a form of multimedia communications that tells stories from a database of media assets. It differs from conventional publishing in that the reader dynamically
participates in shaping the story and the story is adapted to the channel used to distribute it.
Students create stories though the application of the theoretical principles, methods and tools
employed in transmedia publishing and storytelling. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-578 
Printing Process Control
Test targets and color measurement technology are tools used in calibrating various components in a color reproduction system. This course will integrate many technical disciplines, e.g.,
metrology, process control, and color management, to make a color imaging system repeatable and predictable. Emphases will be placed on selecting test targets, color measurement, and
data analysis tools for evaluation of device-level and system-level performance. (Prerequisites:
MAAT-357 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
MAAT-599 
Independent Study
The independent study course in Media Arts and Technology provides students with the means
for obtaining academic credit for work and/or research on topics related to the Media Arts and
Technology curriculum but not covered in the desired breadth or depth. The student works
with an instructor to establish the objectives, content, and evaluation protocol for the study.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

School of Photographic Arts and Sciences
Photographic and Imaging Arts
PHAR-101 
Photographic Arts I
This course will provide an immersive introduction to the field of the Photographic Arts. It will
emphasize both craft and visual problem solving. The course will explore: seeing and appreciating the quality of light, image capture, photographic vision, historical and contemporary
genres of photography, best practices and workflow as well as an introduction to the critique
forum and its practices. (Co-requisites: PHPS-106 or equivalent course.) CRI 3, Lecture 1,
Lab 3, Credits 4 (Fall, Summer)
PHAR-201 
Elements of Fine Art Photography
This course will offer students an introduction to the discipline of fine art photography.
Conceptually driven projects will be investigated through a variety of photographic techniques;
reading, writing and discussion about the intent and meaning of photographic imagery will
be emphasized. Aspects of still photography and moving imagery as artistic choices and practices will be presented. The goal of the course is to establish theoretical, aesthetic and technical
strategies for the production of photographic artwork. (Prerequisites: PHAR-102 or equivalent
course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

PHAR-202 
Elements of Advertising Photography
This course will provide an introduction to the field of commercial photography, as well as
encourage students to develop their own artistic vision. Students will create images from assignments that relate to projects they will encounter after graduation. They will be instructed in
the basic photographic skills needed in the commercial field. Practical use of exposure metering and digital workflow will be discussed. Training will be provided in the use of professional
cameras and lighting equipment, as well as developing a web presence. Portraiture and still
life photography will be covered both in the studio and on location. Students will learn about
career choices available in the commercial photography business. (Prerequisites: PHAR-102
or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHAR-203 
Elements of Photojournalism
This course will serve an introduction to visual story telling as it relates to professional photojournalism. It will provide relevant practice in basic technical, compositional and interpersonal
skills necessary in all aspects of modern photography. Students will be exposed to photojournalism - documentary, editorial, narrative and editing - as well as explorations of current career
possibilities. Lectures, critiques, demonstrations and assignments will provide participants
the opportunity to explore the still, audio, and multimedia strategies used for story telling in
this era. Students will be expected to meet tight project deadlines and participate in both class
discussions, critiques and practices required to be successful in this field. (Prerequisites: PHAR102 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHAR-204 
Elements of Visual Media
This course will provide an introduction to the professional opportunities where the fields of
photography, graphic design and print media overlap. Students will develop an understanding of the working relationships between professionals involved in each of the three career
areas. Successful visual media experts require a contemporary understanding of the business
practices necessary to manage the workflow, financial operations and personnel necessary
for success. Students in this class will experience the breadth of interactions between these
three career paths, and appreciate the management necessary in their dynamic relationships.
(Prerequisites: PHAR-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHAR-360 
Photography in Cuba
This course will offer photography students the unique opportunity to participate in an immersive educational experience while traveling and photographing in Cuba. Through the use of
photography, related field trips and lectures, this course will introduce students to a new culture and environment. Students will be exposed to challenges found in available light situations
where they will photograph environments, architecture, and the people of Cuba. A final portfolio will illustrate effective visual documentation of Cuban culture. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or
PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course and at least 3rd year undergraduate student standing in CIAS.) Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAR-370 
City as Site: Dubai and Beyond
This course offers students in CIAS and at RIT the opportunity to travel to RIT’s Dubai Campus
in the United Arab Emirates for the new intersession. Students will create work inspired by an
unfamiliar locale, (culture, people, place, geography) while having the opportunity to explore
Dubai and the other city /states of the Emirates. This course is focused on the understanding
of place and the conceptual development of a creative project as it relates to a specific locale.
This course is not photography specific and is open to disciplines across the college and campus. The final project may include photography, film, visual projection, or design. (This course
requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAR-399 
Photographic Imaging Arts Part-time Coop
At least one cooperative or internship experience is suggested for all photographic and imaging
arts students prior to graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience
in their field and are generally completed between their second and third academic years. The
RIT Office of Cooperative Education and Career Services assist students in identifying co-op
placements and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term
(fall, spring, summer). (This course is restricted to at least 2nd year standing in PHIMAGBFA, PHTILL-BFA and VISMED-BFA students.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHAR-498 
Photography Internship
The Photography Internship will provide students with the option to work in the photographic or visual communications field. Students may apply for internships to businesses based
on the availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of
an instructor and complete the Internship Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

	

PHAR-499 
Cooperative Education Experience
At least one cooperative or internship experience is suggested for all photographic and imaging
arts students prior to graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience
in their field and are generally completed between their second and third academic years. The
RIT Office of Cooperative Education and Career Services assist students in identifying co-op
placements and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term
(fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHAR-599 
Photography Independent Study
Photography Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized
area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor, will
propose a course of study. Photography Independent Study students must obtain permission
of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Advertising Photography
PHAP-301 
Advertising Photography I
This is the first of a sequence of required advertising photography courses that investigates
visual problem solving when applied to commercial photography. Studio and other controlled
environments will be encountered through assignments. Advertising and editorial solutions and
applications will be covered. The skills necessary to photograph people, places, and things will
be learned through various assignments. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR203 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHAP-302 
Advertising Photography II
Building on the content delivered in Advertising Photography I, Advertising Photography II
will introduce business aspects involved in commercial photography. Students will create selfpromotion materials as well as a resume/cover letter. A cohesive portfolio is required at the end
of the course. Students will also work on a group project, introducing them to the collaborative
nature of the advertising business. Assignments will emphasize conceptual over technical solutions. (Prerequisites: PHAP-301 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-306 
The Collaborative Composite Image
Computer generated imaging (CGI) combined with photography is being widely used in commercial advertising. This course will offer an opportunity for photography students to work in
collaboration with computer graphics students by developing projects that seamlessly unite
photography with CGI. Students will study work being generated professionally and develop
their own projects as a team. A team approach will be employed to design, execute and integrate
images for use in a commercial photography context. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Studio 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHAP-307 
Technology and Image Making
Changing technology continues to influences how photographers capture, modify, distribute, and consume images. This course will emphasize the development of artistic voice in
the context of this evolving climate. By further mastering craft, students will gain experience
in using technology to expand what is possible in the photographic image, both technically
and creatively. Course topics will include photographic creativity, image capture, optimization, construction, manipulation, and distribution. Proficiency in new technologies will push
boundaries of image making, augment a visual vocabulary, and expand creative expression.
(Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHAP-308 
Location Photography
The course will cover the technical and aesthetic decisions necessary to produce successful photographs on location for both advertising and editorial usage. Students will be encouraged to
develop a consistent personal style and maintain rigorous technical photographic standards.
A variety of subject matter will be explored while photographing on location. A final portfolio
will be required for the course. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-203 or
PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHAP-311 
Photographing People
An advanced study of people photography, this course will focus on the development of the
photographic and social skills of the commercial photographer. This course will examine the
effects of light, camera choice, and subject pose on reproducing the human form as a photograph. The student will learn to develop strategies for photographing people, build upon
lighting skills, and improve photographic styling techniques. Casting and directing models,
as well as the role of a professional photographic team will be included in the lectures, demonstrations, and assignments. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-203 or
PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

89

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

PHAP-312 
Projects in Still Life Photography
This course will explore the genre of the still life as a subject in advertising and editorial photography. A variety of forms of photographic expression will be examined as well as solving
visual problems related to the still life image. Both structured and open-ended assignments
will be given. The construction of the still life photograph and the effective use of props and
backgrounds is an important aspect of the course. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR201 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-313 
Editorial Photography
This course explores the role of photography and design in contemporary magazines as well as
online content. Students will have the option of working with still life, people, location, documentary, architecture or fashion photography. Current events will be discussed for picture
possibilities. Emphasis will be placed on producing multiple or sequential images that relate
to social and political issues. Historical and contemporary studies of layout and style will be
examined. A professional quality magazine featuring work done by all students will be produced. All projects will be done in collaboration with students in the Graphic Design Major in
the School of Design. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204)
or equivalent courses.) Studio 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-314 
Lighting Control and Manipulation
The course will provide an opportunity for the experimentation with photographic light and
its manipulation in a variety of situations both in and out of the studio. Assignments will range
from simple portraits in the studio to complex locations, from simple still life set ups to intricate
sets with groups of people. Methods of controlling a variety of lighting devices, both strobe and
continuous-source, will be demonstrated and discussed. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR201 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHAP-320 
XL: Summer Ad Core
This course will provide students with the flexibility of using one studio for the entire course,
allowing students to work as a professional photographer would. Students will work on selfassigned long-term projects with the goal of expanding their portfolio. A cohesive body of work
is required at the end of the course. (Prerequisites: PHAR-202 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-203
or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Summer)
PHAP-326 
Architectural Photography
An image-making course for advanced photography students with a specific interest in
architectural exterior and interior photography. Assignments are designed to emphasize the
development and exploration of professional techniques and styles. Class hours will include
lecture-demonstration, discussion, critique, and both individual and group location work. All
work required will utilize digital capture methods.**Note: This is a non-laboratory, shooting
course** (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to students in PHIMAG-BFA and PHTILL-BFA
with at least 3rd year standing who have completed PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or
PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-327 
Fashion Photography
This course will provide students with an introduction to fashion photography and look at
fashion from a broad imaging perspective. There will be instruction on lighting, styling, and
directing a fashion image, as well as developing concepts for photo shoots. Casting, studio
and location practices, and ethics will be discussed. The history of fashion and photography
will be addressed. Retouching for fashion photographs will be demonstrated. (Prerequisites:
PHAR-202 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 5,
Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-328 
Food Photography
The course will examine the current trends in food photography used in advertising and editorial uses. There will be demonstrations of the techniques of food preparation, staging, styling, and
specialized lighting techniques, with the goal of rendering various foods as appealing and appetizing. (Prerequisites: PHAP-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-336 
People Illustration Photography
An advanced class in portrait photography, this course will focus on the nature of the photographic "fiction" or "illustration". Students will work on specific assignments, many of which
will be generated from aspects of the history of portrait photography. Lighting techniques will be
examined to create more effective photographs. Digital post-production will also be discussed
as a means to enhance the images as required by the assignments. (Prerequisites: PHAP-301
or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

90	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHAP-337 
Production Photography
This class will introduce the storytelling side of professional photographic illustration.
Assignments for this course will include recreating historical events, inventing futuristic
scenes, and creating believable period pieces with an emphasis on visual narrative. Students
will be introduced to project planning, concept development, scheduling, budgeting, casting,
auditions, advanced lighting techniques, comprehensive preparation for large production,
project management and post-production treatments. Students work on production teams
to address large-scale photographic projects. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to students in PHIMAG-BFA and PHTILL-BFA with at least 3rd year standing who have completed
PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio,
Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-338 
Typography for Photographers
This course will introduce the fundamentals of typography used in visual communications.
Lectures will cover a variety of topics, ranging from the history of typography to the use of
type in electronic and photographic media. Special attention will be paid to the combination
of type and image. Assignments will combine photography and typography through a variety
of forms: posters, brochures, web sites, and book design. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-350 
Topics in Advertising Photo
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant changes in practices and technology. Topics in advertising photography will provide students with
the opportunity to explore this shifting terrain of photography and imaging. The content taught
in this course will change frequently and the course may be repeated for credit, however each
particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability. (Prerequisite: Successful completion of
two of the following courses is required PHAR-201, PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHAP-351 
Studio Topics in Advertising Photo
Advertising Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to
constant changes in practices and technology. Studio Topics in Advertising photography will
provide students with the opportunity to explore studio applications in this shifting terrain of
photography, imaging and application. The content taught in this course will change frequently
and the course may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic” may have limits on
repeatability. (Prerequisite: Successful completion of two of the following courses is required
PHAR-201, PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHAP-368 
Introduction to Music Video Production
This interdisciplinary course has been designed for CIAS and GCCIS students working in
collaboration to explore the history of music videos and examine how digital technology is
changing the way music videos are produced and viewed. Students will be introduced to the
resources and tools necessary to produce an interactive music video project with professional
musicians. (Prerequisites: This course is restricted to students in CIAS or GCCIS with at least
3rd year student standing.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-403 
Portfolio Development
This course is required for 4th year advertising photography students who are near to graduation and will be ready to present themselves to potential employers. Weekly assignments
will be designed to move students closer to their stated goals. Existing work will be edited,
sequenced and prepared to form a professional quality portfolio. Additional assignments will
be given leading to the creation of new work. Students will be required to produce promotional
materials, a resume/cover letter, a market research paper and a business plan. (Prerequisites:
PHAP-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHAP-411 
Advertising and Design Photography
This course will pair students in advertising photography with students in graphic design to
produce advertising-related projects. Teams will produce advertising campaigns that merge
graphic design, photography, and copy. Contemporary and historical examples of advertising
imagery will be studied. The ethics and business of advertising photography will be studied
through lectures, discussions, and field trips. (Prerequisites: PHAP-302 or equivalent course.)
Studio 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHAP-416 
New York City Advertising Photography Field Trip
This course will provide advertising photography students the unique opportunity to participate
in a one-week intensive workshop that travels to New York City, the center of the advertising
photography industry. Through this field trip and accompanying lectures and studio visits,
students will experience an introduction to the field of professional photography and related
industries in New York City. The purpose of the trip is to provide a broad view of advertising and editorial photography within the city. Students meet with a variety of photographers,
art directors, designers, filmmakers, photo editors, photographer agents, assistants, and RIT
alumni. Photography studios, advertising agencies, design-studios, magazines, galleries, and
museums will be visited during the one-week field trip. (Prerequisites:PHAP-302 or equivalent
course and 4th year standing in PHIMAG-BFA Advertising Photography option or PHTILLBFA - Advertising Photography option.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

Fine Art Photography
PHFA-101 
Introduction to Film Photography
An introduction to black-and-white still photography (technical, aesthetic, conceptual) for
non-photography majors. Through weekly assignments, students will become familiar with the
operation of a 35mm camera body/lenses and film processing/printing, while exploring basic
principles of lighting, depth of field, principles of design, blur/stop motion, accurate exposure,
and tone control. Lectures will address photographic aesthetics, in addition to historical, contemporary and innovative practices. Students will engage in the language of the critique through
participation in discussions of photographic shooting assignments. Students are required to
provide their own 35mm camera, film and processing, and photo paper. **Note: Non-Photo
majors only** Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHFA-105 
Intro to Digital Photography
An introduction to digital photography (technical, aesthetic, conceptual) for non-photography majors. Through weekly assignments, students will become familiar with the operation
of a DSLR camera body/lens, while exploring the basic principles of lighting, depth of field,
design, blur/stop motion, accurate exposure, and image manipulation. Lectures will address
photographic aesthetics, contemporary and historical practices, and professional applications.
Students will learn to critique work through participation in discussions of photographic assignments. Students are required to have their own DSLR (digital single-lens reflex) camera. **Note:
Non-photo majors only** Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-301 
Fine Art Core I
This course is the first in a sequence of two principle critique and production classes for students
in the Fine Art Photography option of the BFA program. Students will undertake conceptuallydriven assignments to investigate their ideas through a critical engagement with peers within
the context of contemporary photographic practices. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 and (PHAR202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHFA-302 
Fine Art Core II
This course is the second in a sequence of two principle production and critique classes for
students in the Fine Art Photography option of the BFA program. Each student will analyze, interpret and develop a meaningful practice to create personal artwork. Course emphasis
requires students to produce a photography-based independent body of work and demonstrate
best practices within the fine arts. (Prerequisites: PHFA-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
PHFA-311 
Contemporary Issues
A study of current issues relevant to imaging-based fine art and related media; how they relate
to broader historical/cultural issues, and how they might suggest future directions. Emphasis
is placed on the integration of critical theoretical discourse and studio practice. Contemporary
Issues courses vary in subject and content. This course is a touchstone to current and future
fine art practices through its engagement with a variety of subjects. (Prerequisites: PHAR201 and (PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-350 
Topics in Fine Art Photography
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant changes in practices and technology. Topics in Fine Art Photography will provide students with the
opportunity to explore this shifting terrain of photography and imaging related to personal
exploration and self-expression. The content taught in this course will change frequently and
the course may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic” may have limits on
repeatability. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-351 
Studio Topics in Fine Art Photography
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant changes in practices and technology. Studio Topics in Fine Art Photography will provide students
with the opportunity to explore studio applications in this shifting terrain of photography and
imaging. The content taught in this course will change frequently and the course may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability. (Prerequisite:
Successful completion of two of the following courses is required PHAR-201, PHAR-202,
PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-359 
The Constructed Image
This course will introduce students to the concept, theory, and practice of constructed imagery within the context of contemporary photography. Image making will be explored from
creating interventions within the landscape to the manipulation of space in and out of studio
spaces as a method of creating photographs. Participants will be introduced to the history of
constructed imagery and the impact this working methodology has towards the contemporary
dialog in photography. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Studio, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

PHFA-361 
Retouch and Restore
This course will explore the techniques, tools, practices, and workflows used in image restoration and retouching. We will begin with historical images to practice basic retouching and
restoration techniques. We will then apply these skills to contemporary images and discuss the
importance of the collaborative role of the image maker and the re-toucher. One of the primary
goals is to help students craft a personal or signature imaging style. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201
or PHAR-202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHFA-362 
The Fine Print Workflow
This course will discuss the latest advances in digital workflow, best practices and output technology. The emphasis will be on the creation of an optimal and efficient fine art print workflow
with reproducible results. This will be achieved through the integration of the various software tools and technology at our disposal. Using these techniques, we will build optimized
files and craft final, exhibition quality prints. We will also discuss the various substrate options
along with archival issues and finishing. This course is intended to build on and update skills
learned in previous photographic foundation courses. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR-202
or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHFA-363 
Black and White Photography I
This course, the first part of a two-semester sequence, will introduce students to the exposure
and development of black and white film and the procedures for making high quality black and
white photographic prints in a traditional darkroom with chemicals, safe lights and enlargers.
Included in this course are 35mm, medium and large-format cameras, variables in making fine
black and white prints and techniques for archival and museum quality processes and methods
of display. Students must have access to a film camera with adjustable exposure controls. Each
student will produce a finished portfolio of black and white fine prints. (This course is available
to RIT degree-seeking undergraduate students.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHFA-364 
Black and White Photography II
This course, the second course of a two-semester sequence, will introduce students to the use
and manipulation of specialty analog cameras (pinhole, Holga, Hasselblad fish-eye, X-Pan,
view camera, etc.). In addition to the hardware resources, the course will survey and demonstrate methods of making monoprints one of a kind photographs using analog processes
such as photogram, chemogram, wet plate ambrotype, and hand-coloring. Students will also
interpret selections of work by noted photographic artists and others enrolled in the course in
both critiques and written assignments. A creative portfolio of black and white prints and/or
monoprints will be produced by each student. (Prerequisites: PHFA-363 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHFA-365 
Art and the Internet
This course will investigate the use of the internet by artists as a means of distributing their
work, creating an audience, engaging in multidisciplinary practices and, most importantly,
conceptualizing work for an interactive, web-based interface utilizing current technologies.
Students will learn how to design, publish and maintain web sites as an online exhibition of their
work. Students will learn to publish still images, video and other digital media. Supported by
critical and theoretical writings published since the advent of digital imaging and the internet,
we will examine what it means for artists to create work for a potentially unlimited audience
that operates outside of the traditional museum/gallery/object-oriented distribution network.
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-366 
Advanced Retouching and Compositing
In this advanced level course, we will begin where the retouching and restoration class left off.
Building on the foundation of those techniques, we will delve deeper into the software tools
and more advanced workflows used in image restoration, retouching and compositing. Once
the retouching and restoration techniques have been mastered, we will transition into collage
and montage building. This will include working with multiple images in single or multiple
frames. We will expand the discussion of the collaborative roles of the Image Maker and the
Retoucher in relation to creating composite images. (Prerequisites: PHFA-361 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHFA-375 
Zone System and Fine Print
This course will introduce the use and methods required in the Zone System and used in making
the Fine Print using primarily black and white analog photography. A full review of the basics
of exposure and development practices will be covered as well as how the technology supports
visual concepts. Purpose, aesthetics and technique of the zone system and fine printing are the
content of the course. Numerous field trips, lectures, and demonstrations will be given. The
student will complete this course by producing a visually and technically competent portfolio.
(Prerequisites: PHFA-363 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-376 
Preservation Care of Photographs
This course will expose students to the field of photographic conservation and professional
practices. Even in the digital era, millions of film and paper images are in greater need of preservation and conservation than at any point in history. (Prerequisites: PHAR-212 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

91

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

PHFA-381 
Large Format Printing
The course will examine the differences large-format camera use can bring to photographs.
Camera controls and movements unique to view cameras will be discussed and demonstrated. The differences between large-format film cameras and current digital cameras will also
be discussed. Demonstrations will be given on the following topics: swings and tilts, selective
focus, lens selection, and other features of the view camera. Students will expose, process, and
print black and white film. Color negative film materials will also be examined. (Prerequisites:
PHFA-363 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 8, Credits 4 (Spring)

Photojournalism

PHFA-402 
Fine Art Photo Portfolio I
This course represents the culmination of the studio/critique experience for students in Fine
Art Photography. Having established a working artistic methodology in previous courses, students will consolidate a final body of work through the critical engagement with their peers.
The focus of the course will lead to the completion of a printed portfolio or other final expression of their work such as video or an installation. Studio practices and extensive critique
experiences will be featured in this course. (Prerequisites: PHFA-302 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

PHPJ-302 
Photojournalism I
This course will explore the use of the photographic image in narrative, documentary and editorial form. There will be an emphasis on publication, public need and independent projects.
Lectures, critiques, demonstrations and assignments will provide participants the opportunity to explore the still, audio, video, and multimedia aspects of story telling. Students will
be expected to meet project deadlines and participate in both class discussions and critiques.
(Prerequisites: PHAR-203 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

PHFA-403 
Fine Art Photography Portfolio II
This course represents the culmination of the studio/critique experience for students in Fine
Art Photography. Having established a working artistic methodology in the previous fine art
courses, students will consolidate a final body of work through the critical engagement with
their peers and faculty. The focus of the course will lead to the completion of a printed portfolio or other final expression of their work such as video or installation. Studio practices and
extensive critique experiences will be featured in this course. (Prerequisites: PHFA-402 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHFA-531 
New York City Fine Art Photography Field
Fine art photography students in this class will have the unique opportunity to participate in a
one-week intensive workshop that travels to New York City, arguably the center of the photography industry. During the field trip and accompanying lectures and studio/museum/gallery
visits students will gain an immersive exposure to the field of fine art and applied photography
and related its industries in New York City. Students will meet with a variety of photographers,
art gallery directors, museum personnel, studio artists, assistants, and RIT alumni. Photography
studios, magazines, galleries, and photo/art museums and universities will also be visited during
the one- week field trip. (Prerequisites: PHFA-302 or equivalent course and 4th year standing
in PHIMAG-BFA PHFA.) Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHFA-540 
Gallery Management
This course covers all aspects of gallery administration and exhibition implementation. Skills
to be developed and explored include: framing artwork; preparing exhibition text and support
materials; writing press releases; developing fundraising strategies and researching funding
sources; writing a grant application; gallery maintenance; unpacking and laying out a show;
and understanding the aesthetics of showing pictures in a gallery, including sequencing and
space arrangement. Course practicum is achieved with actual exhibitions on campus and in
the Rochester area. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHFA-556 
Moving Media I
This course explores the history and evolution of the moving image in art. Students will record
digital video and utilize electronic imagery to create new work that expands the disciplines
of photography and video. Projects will involve creating experimental narratives, conceptual
constructions, and performance pieces. Students will work with traditional photographic processes, electronic media, web resources, editing software, and projection technologies to create
and display their new visual media work. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHFA-557 
Moving Media II
This course uses the skills developed in Moving Media I to work with time-based imagery
on projects utilizing advanced visual language and technical skills. Students learn to record
sound with off-camera microphones and sound recorders. Historic and contemporary media
artists will be studied, analyzing various strategies used to convey ideas. Students will design
a series of independent projects and produce a final project for presentation in the Media
Cafe. (Prerequisites: PHFA-556 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHFA-565 
Color Photography Seminar
This course is a creative exploration of the hybrid technology between traditional film-based
color photography and digital imaging. Students will use film and progress through analog
to digital conversion. Proper scanning techniques, information on proper color management
and procedures for digital image editing and manipulation will be outlined. Various methods
of printed output will be discussed and explored. Students will conceive and design their own
photographic project and produce a portfolio of prints. (Prerequisites: PHAR-201 or PHAR202 or PHAR-203 or PHAR-204 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

92	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHPJ-301 
Foundations of Photojournalism
This course is designed to help students learn the history of photojournalism and write a proposal for an independent senior project. Students will develop the research skills necessary to
create a written proposal that describes, in detail, their intention and process. Students will
incorporate historical photojournalism topics into their written drafts. (Prerequisites: PHAR203 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

PHPJ-303 
Photojournalism II
This advanced course will explore and expand on the use of the photographic image in narrative, documentary and editorial form. The emphasis of the course will be on professional
practices, professional visual story telling, and publication. Lectures, critiques, demonstrations,
and assignments will provide participants the opportunity to explore the still and multimedia
aspects of storytelling. Students gain insight into the business of photojournalism and develop an awareness of career options available to them. Students will be expected to meet project
deadlines and participate in both class discussions and critiques. (Prerequisites: PHPJ-302 or
equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPJ-306 
Picture Editing I
This course focuses on image selection, usage and design. Using images from a variety of
sources, we discuss picture selection relative to context and desired impact in print and online.
Effective use of images for a variety of story applications will be discussed. Design techniques
that maximize impact and story telling will be investigated, including scaling, proportion,
sequencing, visual variety and sizing. Students will design a number of assignments from
single pages to multi-page essays of varying length. (Prerequisites: PHAR-203 and (PHAR201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPJ-307 
Ethics and Law
This course introduces students to principles and theories of ethics and their application to
editorial photography and photojournalism for mass communications. It establishes a basic
understanding of philosophical ethics, social responsibility, and professional practices within
the protections and responsibilities of the First Amendment. The course will also review the
legal issues relating to photographic practice and access to subjects. The course examines a
wide range of case examples for discussion and analysis to build a foundation for professional
practice. (Prerequisites: PHAR-203 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or PHAR-204) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPJ-311 
Picture Editing II
Picture Editing II is designed for students to develop and express creative ideas, shape visual texts, and convey stories, concepts, and viewpoints through the understanding of image
sequencing, and layout. Using images from a variety of sources, we discuss how to use images
effectively in a variety of story applications and media. This course also emphasizes project
management and managing assignments, photographers and editors. This is a non-shooting
course, and students will work with existing professional images to develop visual narratives
and essays in a variety of media. Students will study market segmentation, new audiences, new
forms of content delivery, and other consequences associated with rapid changes in technology. Consideration will also be given to ongoing changes in professional photographic practice.
Students will develop strategies for working in a professional environment. (PHPJ-306 Prereq)
Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHPJ-315 
Non-Fiction Multimedia
This course teaches students how to tell stories in the digital world. Students will learn the skills
necessary to gather and edit audio and how to combine audio, images, and text for compelling
online storytelling. In addition to basic technical skills, the course will explore contemporary
concepts for effective multimedia storytelling. (Prerequisites: PHAR-203 or 2067-303 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHPJ-319 
Multimedia Editing for PJ
This course prepares students with multimedia editing skills. Students will use audio and video editing software to create multimedia projects with existing assets and adapt story-telling
techniques for a variety of media. (Prerequisites: PHAR-203 and (PHAR-201 or PHAR-202 or
PHAR-204) or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

PHPJ-350 
Topics Photojournalism
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant
changes in practices and technology. Topics in photojournalism will provide students with
the opportunity to explore this shifting terrain of photography and imaging using contemporary problems. The content taught in this course will change frequently and the course
may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability.
(Prerequisite: Successful completion of two of the following courses is required PHAR-201,
PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

PHPJ-402 
Photojournalism Portfolio
This course explores career options, assesses individual skills and temperament, and establishes initial and long-term career goals for each student. Students then develop portfolios with
an emphasis on their established goals. Issues in new media and forms of presentation are
addressed, as well as building a professional life beyond the entry-level job. Job research, resume
development, preparation, application and interviewing skills are incorporated into an examination of the changes in media publications and their use of photographers and photographic
images. (Prerequisites: PHPJ-401 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

PHPJ-351 
Studio Topics in Photojournalism
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant
changes in practices and technology. Topics in photojournalism will provide students with
the opportunity to explore studio applications in this shifting terrain of photography and imaging when applied to contemporary situations resident in this dynamic industry. The content
taught in this course will change frequently and the course may be repeated for credit, however
each particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability. (Prerequisite: Successful completion
of two of the following courses is required PHAR-201, PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

PHPJ-465 
Documentary II
This course explores the dialogue between images and texts in relation to lived experience.
This course takes the introductory experiences from the course Documentary I and builds on
those experiences to look more deeply at a single subject or issue. The course examines particular problems, challenges, and responsibilities of documentary work and representing the
lives of others to an outside audience. This course approaches documentary work through
case studies and field work, and requires students to apply theoretical readings and critiques
of published documentary work to their own projects. (Prerequisites: PHPJ-365 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

PHPJ-355 
Multimedia for PJ II
This course provides students with advanced multimedia techniques and introduces photographers to storytelling and reporting using still cameras with video and sound capture features.
Students will research and produce multimedia work in class. (Prerequisites: PHPJ-315 or
equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

PHPJ-466 
DC Photojournalism Trip
This course provides photography students the unique opportunity to participate in a oneweek intensive workshop that travels to Washington, D.C., the center of the photojournalism
business outside of New York City. The purpose of the trip is to provide a broad view of documentary and editorial photography in the industry and give students an idea of the wide variety
of potential job markets that exist for documentary/editorial work. Students will meet with a
variety of photographers, photo editors, and designers, including RIT alumni, while visiting
print and online publications (magazines and newspapers), governmental agencies, photo agencies, photography studios, galleries, and museums. **Fee: A special course fee will be assessed**
(Prerequisites: PHPJ-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)

PHPJ-356 
Alternate Influences
This course introduces students to a wide range of disciplines that influence image making.
Students will develop a new vocabulary for discussing their own work as well as the work of
those who came before them. They will develop a respect, through knowledge and experience,
for practitioners of other aesthetic disciplines - artistic, cultural, and others - with regards to
photography and, specifically, photojournalism. Students will explore various forms of literary, cinematic, poetic, and lyrical storytelling as influences on photojournalism. (Prerequisites:
PHAR-203 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPJ-361 
Working On Location
This course is designed to prepare students for on-location assignments, which includes planning and preparation for challenging photographic issues and conditions. Students will learn
how to prepare for and address constituency issues, logistical issues, safety issues, and lighting problems. Additionally, students will work with image transmission and wireless remotes
to address specific assignment needs and storytelling. (Prerequisites: PHPJ-302 or equivalent
course. Co-requisites: PHPJ-303 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHPJ-365 
Documentary I
This course will address historical, social, political, and ethical issues as they relate to documentary photography. Within its history, documentary photography has been seen as personal
artistic expression, a form of anthropological research, a tool for social change and even propaganda. Documentary photography is also frequently newsworthy, and selected images from
more extensive projects have become a part of daily editorial and press coverage. While studying forms, structures and the nature of documentary work, students will complete an in-depth
project of sufficient substance to require the application and consideration of these issues.
(Prerequisites: PHPJ-303 or PHPJ-311 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)
PHPJ-366 
NYC Photojournalism Trip
This course provides students the unique opportunity to participate in a one-week intensive
workshop that travels to New York City, the center of the photojournalism business in the US.
The purpose of the trip is to provide a broad view of documentary and editorial photography
in the industry and give students an idea of the wide variety of potential job markets that exist
for documentary/editorial work. Students will meet with a variety of photographers, art directors, designers, photo editors, photographer agents, including RIT alumni, while visiting print
and online publications (magazines and newspapers), photo agencies, photography studios,
galleries, and museums. **Note: A special course fee will be assessed ** (Prerequisites: PHPJ302 or equivalent course.) Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHPJ-401 
Senior Project
This course is an independent study project that demands the student execute the accepted
Senior Project Proposal. Students will have the support and guidance of a faculty member. The
process will result in the production of a visual media presentation, a book/hardcopy portfolio or a collaborative editing portfolio and a written statement and conclusion. Course will
include weekly group presentations on various topics to include time management, research,
planning, photographic and photojournalistic subjects. (Prerequisites: PHPJ-301 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

Photo Visual Media
PHVM-301 
Visual Media Career Research
This course will introduce students to the practical methods for researching possible careers
and opportunities after graduation. Using Internet and library research, students will identify a
career field that might interest them. Further investigations will focus on the realities of working
in that environment so that further decisions can be made leading to that career. This course
is required for all 3rd year Visual Media majors. (VISMED-BFA) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHVM-350 
Topics in Visual Media
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant
changes in practices and technology. Topics in visual media will provide students with the
opportunity to explore this shifting terrain of photography and imaging. The content taught
in this course will change frequently and the course may be repeated for credit, however each
particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability. (Prerequisite: Successful completion of
two of the following courses is required PHAR-201, PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHVM-351 
Studio Topics in Visual Media
Photography (and photographic education) is in a perpetual state of flux due to constant changes in practices and technology. Studio topics in visual media will provide students with the
opportunity to explore studio applications in this shifting terrain of photography and imaging as applied to business and the graphic arts. The content taught in this course will change
each frequently and the course may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic”
may have limits on repeatability. (Prerequisite: Successful completion of two of the following courses is required PHAR-201, PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.) Lab 3, Lecture 2,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHVM-401 
Visual Media Capstone
This course is the second required for all 4th year Visual Media Majors and is last visual Media
required courses in the curriculum. As such, students will be finalizing their career preparation
in anticipation of entry into the industry of choice. The course will require a major media project, allowing students to create a package/portfolio that represents their photographic, design,
printing and management skills. (This course is restricted to PHIMAG-BFA, VISMED-BFA,
PHVMEDIA or PHITLL-BFA students.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Photographic and Imaging Technologies
IMPT-301 
Applied Color Theory
This course investigates the principles of color science including theory and application. Topics
include CIE colorimetry, color transformations, color order systems, metamerism, color inconstancy, color tolerance equations and spaces. (Prerequisites: PHPS-211 or equivalent course
and student standing in PHIMTEC-BS or IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

93

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

IMPT-306 e-Sensitometry
This course provides students with immersive experiences investigating the design of imaging systems and related technology with an emphasis on device characterization and image
quality metrics and standards. Input and output standards including photographic and video
systems will be covered in detail. Additionally, the course will explore measurable and subjective evaluations required for image quality. (Prerequisites: PHPS-202 or equivalent course
and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lab 3, Lecture
2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMPT-307 
Survey of Non-Conventional Imaging Systems
This course will provide an overview of imaging methods and imaging systems including principles of photographic surveying, mapping photogrammetry and aerial photography, photofinish
photography, panoramic photography, peripheral photography, scanning imaging, infrared/
ultraviolet photography, three-dimensional imaging including lenticular photography and
alternative imaging such as schlieren, thermography, electrophotography and other specialized
applications. Topics may vary from year to year allowing for the introduction of newly developing applications and systems. (Prerequisites: PHPS-202 or equivalent course and student
standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMPT-311 
Color Measurement
This is the second in a two-course required imaging core sequence, the first being Applied Color
Theory. Students develop the background and skills required for successful laboratory practice
in color measurement as used in scientific research. This includes data management, data analysis, and technical writing. Topics include the optical and electronic design of spectroradiometric
and spectrophotometric instrumentation, the use of standard reference materials for calibration, data analysis techniques, properties of objects and radiation, evaluation of instrumentation
and psychophysical experimentation. (Prerequisites: PHPS-211 or equivalent course and student standing in PHIMTEC-BS or IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMPT-312 
High Speed Photography
This course will investigate the theory and applications of photographic systems designed to
record events of very short duration. The images will be analyzed to gain a more complete
understanding of short duration events. Included in the course will be comparisons of the
characteristics of high-speed motion picture and digital video cameras, sequencing and timing
control devices, as well as time magnification relationships. Basic characteristics of intermittent
and rotating prism cameras, rotating mirror and drum cameras, synchronization systems and
timing controls and high-speed flash and stroboscopic systems will also be covered in some
detail. Introduction to high-speed video recording as well as the introduction to shadowgraph
and schlieren imaging systems will be included. Students will gain basic experiences not only
in the operation of equipment but also in proper planning, setup and basic data reduction techniques. (This class is restricted to students in PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS, PHBM-BS or IMGS-BS.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMPT-321 
Programming for Imaging and Photographic Technology
This course will introduce students to the IDL programming environment as a data visualization
tool and a programming language. Students will learn the various capabilities of the language
and how it can be used to rapidly prototype solutions to various imaging-related problems.
As these solutions are developed, fundamental concepts of programming and data structures
will be introduced. (Prerequisites: PHPS-202 or equivalent course and student standing in the
PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMPT-322 
Digital Image Processing
This course covers the principles and fundamental techniques in writing digital image processing algorithms and computer programming techniques that are used in implementing
said algorithms. Topics covered will include color space transformations, basic image manipulation, and spatial and frequency manipulations. (This course is restricted to students in the
PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS and PHBM-BS programs.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Imaging Systems
IMSM-301 
Imaging Systems
This course will explore the business and technology fundamentals of imaging systems.
There will be an emphasis on the operation of devices/components used in imaging systems.
Fundamental concepts prevalent in imaging systems such as resolution, dynamic range, sensor architectures, printer and monitor. (APIMGS-MN) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMSM-302 
Color Management Technology
This course, primarily designed for photographers, will provide students with a hands-on
experience using software and hardware used in the imaging industry. It has been organized
to expose students to managed color from capture to output. The course will review industry
standard color instruments and give the essential knowledge and skills required to solve problems prevalent in the photographic field. Critical problem solving of accurate color reproduction
across media will be investigated. (Prerequisites: IMSM-301 or equivalent course and student
standing in the APIMGS-MN minor.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

94	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

IMSM-303 
Imaging Workflows
This course will investigate current principles of digital imaging used to solve specific problems in the contemporary imaging field. Highly problematic issues will be investigated as case
studies. Students will propose solutions to various problems that might be investigated in a realworld situation. The course will evaluate applications of concepts learned in previous classes
and used in a group project creating a catalog or a book. Different projects are attempted each
year. (Prerequisites: IMSM-302 or equivalent course and student standing in the APIMGS-MN
minor.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Biomedical Photography
PHBM-312 
Magnified Imaging II
The microscope has proven itself to be an important tool for investigation since its invention
in 1595. This course has been designed to go well beyond the basics required for the creation of
magnified images of invisible objects. Students will explore objects using a variety of microscopy
techniques including differential interference contrast, fluorescence, phase contrast, reflected
light and polarized light. The course will investigate both the optical and digital enhancement
techniques made possible in contemporary times. Video, motion stopping using electronic
flash as well as specimen preparation will be part of the coursework. (Prerequisites: PHBM311 or equivalent course and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS or IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS
program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHBM-316 
Digital Media I
This is the first of two required courses for students who have declared the Biomedical
Photographic Communications option in the junior year. The course explores the use of motion
imagery and digital video technology as it relates to the design and production of instructional
media. Students will work in production teams utilizing digital video equipment to complete
assignments that involve pre-production planning, field production and post-production editing tasks. The focus of work done in this class will be the production of media used in support
of training and marketing activities commonly found in corporate, governmental, industrial
and scientific communities. (Prerequisites: PHPS-212 or equivalent course and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHBM-317 
Digital Media II
This is the second of two required courses that Biomedical Photographic Communications
option students take in their junior year. The course explores the use of digital media in the
design, production and delivery of instructional and marketing content. Students will plan
and produce projects that integrate audio, still images, interactivity, 2D animation and video.
The course also explores the technology and production techniques involved in delivering
digital media via interactive DVDs as well. as publishing multimedia content to the Internet.
Additionally, the course will provide an introduction to basic instructional technology concepts that influence design, development and assessment decisions. The focus of work done
in this class will be the production of media used in support of training and marketing activities commonly found in corporate, governmental, industrial, and scientific communities.
(Prerequisites: PHBM-316 or equivalent course and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS or
IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHBM-321 
Ophthalmic Photography I
This is the first course of a series that will investigate proper patient management and camera/
photographic techniques required in contemporary ophthalmic photography and imaging.
Diagnostic evaluation of ocular anatomy and physiology utilizing special cameras/equipment
is presented. In addition to retinal fundus photography, students will learn diagnostic medical imaging techniques such as fluorescein angiography, fundus autofluorescence, optical
coherence tomography and scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Retinal disease processes and recognition will also be investigated. (Prerequisites: PHPS-202 or equivalent course and student
standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHBM-322 
Ophthalmic Photography II
This second course in the series will investigate proper patient management and camera/
photographic techniques required in contemporary ophthalmic photography and imaging.
Diagnostic evaluation of ocular anatomy and physiology utilizing special cameras/equipment
is presented. Ophthalmological disease processes and recognition will also be emphasized.
Advanced ophthalmological imaging modalities will be explored, including slit lamp biomicrography and fundus autofluorescence. **Note: A clinical component is required of students
enrolled in this course** (Prerequisites: PHBM-321 or equivalent course and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Imaging Arts and Sciences

PHBM-326 
Photographic Sciences Bulletin I
This course is the first of a two-semester sequence exposing students to the production of a 16
page grayscale magazine based content and activities relevant to the Photographic and Imaging
Technologies curriculum. The award winning BPC Bulletin was first published in 1987. The fall
and first issue will be produced as a black-and-white issue and will require the student editors
to develop or create content - both written and photographic; design an appropriate schedule including magazine workflow; design and layout the magazine using contemporary tools;
work closely with print service providers to optimize quality, control costs; proof and publish
the magazine. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHBM-327 
Photographic Sciences Bulletin II
In the second course and the spring issue, students will be expected to explore new facets of
producing a professional 16-page 4-color magazine based on experiences gained from the fall
issue. The second issue should include solving new and challenging problems including optimized color reproduction. Publications and BPC Bulletin will require the students to collect
or create content - both written and photographic; design the production schedule and workflow; design and layout the magazine using contemporary tools; work closely with print service
providers to optimize quality, control costs; proof; evaluate; and publish the final publication.
Traditionally the spring print and web issue has been mailed to alumni and professionals working in the field. The award winning BPC Bulletin was first published in 1987. (Prerequisites:
PHBM-326 or equivalent course and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBMBS program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Photographic Sciences
PHPS-101 
Photography I
This course is the first of a two-semester sequence exploring the fundamentals of photography,
with emphasis on the development of strong photographic skills as they relate to the principles of DSLR cameras, lenses, choosing and using perspective, lighting and related aspects of
photographic skills. Principles of creativity, craftsmanship, applied photographic theory and
presentation will be used to solve visual communication problems. (This course is restricted
to students in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS and PHBM-BS programs.) Lab, Studio, Lecture,
Credits 4 (Fall)
PHPS-102 
Photography II
This course is the second of a two-semester sequence of study in more advanced photographic
practices. Emphasis is on improving photographic skills learned in Photography I. Skills include
studio light, artificial lighting on location, and macro photography. Principles of creativity,
craftsmanship, and applied photographic theory will be used to support technical applications.
(Prerequisites: PHPS-101 or equivalent course and student standing in PHIMTEC-BS, IMPTBS or PHBM-BS program.) Lab, Studio, Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
PHPS-106 
Photographic Technology I
This first course of a two-semester course will explore the basic technology required for producing photographs, with an emphasis on applications to real world photographic problems.
Among the topics studied in the course will be lenses, image formation and evaluation, perspective, light sources, light-sensitive materials, exposure, digital systems and post-processing,
tone reproduction, digital workflows, variability, quality control and photographic effects. (This
course is restricted to students in the PHTILL-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA, IMPT-BS, PHIMTEC-BS,
PHBM-BS and VISMED-BFA programs.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHPS-107 
Photographic Technology II
This is the second course in a two-semester course based in the study of the technology of
photography, with emphasis on applications to real world photographic problems. Among the
topics studied will include color vision, Munsell color system, CIELAB system, color theory,
color management, digital color balance during post-processing, digital tone reproduction, and
digital workflows. (Prerequisites: PHPS-106 or equivalent course and student standing in the
PHTILL-BFA or PHIMTEC-BS or PHIMAG-BFA or IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS or VISMED-BFA
program.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPS-206 
Careers and Professional Practices
This course will introduce students to career options following graduation. Alumni from various industries will visit classes to discuss their careers. Professional practices, including resume
writing, interviewing techniques, professional communications, as well as writing proposals,
bids, contracts, and technical reports will be taught. Additional topics will include intellectual property, workplace ethics, and presentations. (This course is restricted to students in the
PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS and PHBM-BS programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

PHPS-207 
Vision, Perception and Imaging
This course will explore the anatomical structure, function, and physiology of the human eye
and brain and their relationship to vision, color, visual perception and imaging systems. Both
the physiology and psychology of visual perception will be explored. The concepts of depth
perception in human vision as they relate to both two-dimensional and three-dimensional contexts will be explored. Relationships of image brightness, contrast and how visual processes
lead to seeing will be addressed. (This course is restricted to 2nd year PHIMTEC-BS or IMPTBS or PHBM-BS students.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPS-211 
Advanced Principles of Photographic Technology
This required course will investigate advanced photographic technology, with an emphasis
on the study of the components of photographic imaging systems. Geometrical optics, color
management, printing technologies and video standards will also be studied. Working in a lab
environment, students will evaluate how technology can be optimized and where its limitations
might be found. (Prerequisites: PHPS-107 or equivalent course and student standing in the
PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHPS-212 
Fundamentals of Layout and Design
This course will explore basic principles of effective desktop publishing specific to the needs of
corporate, governmental, industrial, and scientific communities. Students will explore fundamental layout and design principles required to produce a variety of visually effective digital
and print media pieces, including resumes, posters, brochures, flyers, books, and magazines.
Assignments are designed to emphasize the effective use of design and typography specific
to print media as well as other digital delivery methods where the delivery of facts is critical.
(This course is restricted to students in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS and PHBM-BS programs.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHPS-302 
Forensic Photography
Proper documentation of crime scenes and evidence is extremely important in the investigation
of crimes by police agencies and forensic labs. This course will provide hands-on experience
documenting crime scenes and related evidence and preparing those images for presentation
in court. Topics covered will include crime scene management, evidence handling, crime scene
documentation, general evidence documentation, photographic techniques for the enhancement of evidence, and court display preparation. (Prerequisites: PHPS-202 or equivalent course
and student standing in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 (Spring)
PHPS-303 
Nature and Natural Sciences Photography
This practical photography course will teach students how to apply scientific, technical and
graphic imaging principles to optimize their natural science photography in the field, lab or
studio. Students will produce publication-quality images using conventional and close-up
lenses, scanners, artificial light sources (flash and flashlights), ambient light modifiers such
as diffusers and tenting while documenting specimens in both the field and lab. Students will
utilize post-production software and learn the constraints and ethics of image manipulation in
natural science communication/publication. Students will photograph as their schedules permit
and are encouraged to participate in volunteer field trips. (This course is restricted to students
in the PHTILL-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA, IMPT-BS, PHIMTEC-BS, PHBM-BS and VISMED-BFA
programs.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHPS-306 
Historical Photographic Processes
This course examines early photographic processes at the molecular level. The chemical concepts of equilibrium, reactivity and kinetics within photographic systems will be examined.
Light-sensitive chemistry and formulations, as well as processing chemicals formulations and
mechanisms of chemical action, will be demonstrated. An intensive laboratory and darkroom
component will emphasize applications covered in lectures and allow students to explore contact printing using silver halide, cyanotype, Van Dyke, and other early and recently revived
historical and alternative processes. (Prerequisites: PHPS-107 or equivalent course and at least
3rd year standing in PHBM-BS or IMPT-BS or PHIMTEC-BS or PHIMAG-BFA or PHTILLBFA or VISMED-BFA.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPS-307 
Surgical Photography
The role of photography in the digital era has transformed medical photography. With the
new collaboration between RIT & Rochester General Hospital, students have a unique access
to a hospital, surgical patients, and related medical procedures. Students who might take this
course will be exposed to the issues and methods used in contemporary surgical photography.
Students will be exposed to the fundamental photographic equipment and procedures used in
operating rooms including proper file management in this era of HIPAA regulations. At the
end of the course, students will have visited the surgery theater at least three times with the
objective of making photographs. (This course is restricted to students with at least 3rd year
standing in PHTILL-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA, IMPT-BS, PHIMTEC-BS, PHBM-BS or VISMEDBFA.) Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

95

College of Liberal Arts

PHPS-311 
Panoramic Photography
The panoramic photography course is wonderful opportunity for students to learn the various
aspects of making both VR panorama movies and panoramic prints. Students will be exposed
to camera and lens considerations required when using various stitching software. The course
will expose students to the advantages and disadvantages of various approaches currently used
including imaging in high dynamic range situations such as found in the real estate and hotel
markets. Students will create panorama VR movies that can be delivered using HTML methods
or produce one large mural print. (This course is restricted to students with at least 3rd year
standing in PHTILL-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA, IMPT-BS, PHIMTEC-BS, PHBM-BS or VISMEDBFA.) Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)
PHPS-315 
Web Publishing
Photographers have always communicated visually and the accessibility of the World Wide
Web creates a potential audience of millions. This course explores the nature of the World
Wide Web, web sites and the process of designing, building and maintaining these sites for
self-promotion, business, or other applications. Students will be given the opportunity to apply
current technologies and production techniques to the delivering of image portfolios and other
digital media content to the Internet. Interactivity, design, structure, viability and the successful
delivery of ideas will be emphasized. (This course is restricted to students with a least 2nd year
standing in PHTILL-BFA, IMPT-BS, PHBM-BS, PHTILL-BFA, PHIMTEC-BS or PHIMAG-BFA,
VISMED-BFA or JOURNAL-BS.) Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHPS-316 
Scanning Electron Microscopy
This course is designed to teach students how to operate and create images with a scanning electron microscope. Emphasis is on the understanding and optimization of the instrumental and
photographic parameters associated with the SEM. A final poster is produced that examines and
documents a single sample. (Prerequisites: PHPS-202 or equivalent course and student standing
in the PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS or PHBM-BS programs.) Lab 6, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPS-321 
Underwater Digital Photography
This course is to prepare students for photographic assignments in an underwater environment. To accomplish this, students will complete basic scuba diving training and achieve a
Professional Association of Dive Instructors (PADI) scuba diving certification. The student will
become familiar with basic shooting techniques, underwater photography camera housings,
accessories, and equipment care and maintenance. There is an additional course fee that covers equipment, off campus facilities and insurance. (Prerequisites: Minimum 2nd year student
standing in PHTILL-BFA, PHIMAG-BFA, PHIMTEC-BS, IMPT-BS, PHBM-BS or VISMEDBFA.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
PHPS-322 
Advanced Diving and Underwater Imaging
Students will develop underwater research skills, photo-documentation skills, underwater
lighting techniques, camera positioning, working with a model, and working as a member of
an interdisciplinary team. This course prepares students to complete a marine photographic
project in an underwater environment. Students will as part of this course complete the PADI
Advanced Diving Course and the Enriched Air Specialty Course. The project will take place in
the Caribbean as part of the multidisciplinary experience. The final project with be a research
paper and multimedia presentation. **Fee: There is an additional cost for the study abroad
class** and **Note: Travel will be taking place during Intersession, course will be scheduled
Spring term** (Prerequisites: PHPS-321 or equivalent course and minimum of 2nd year standing.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3
PHPS-323 
Advanced Diving and Underwater Imaging II
Students who enroll will develop additional underwater research skills, photo-documentation
skills, and problem-solving skills used in underwater lighting techniques, camera positioning,
and working as a member of an interdisciplinary team. These will build on experiences gained
from the first dive trip. The course will provide students repeating the experience with mentorship and dive lead opportunities as well as the opportunity to acquire additional advanced
diving certifications. Students will be required to demonstrate advanced dive planning and
management skills for a group of divers. Students will also complete an individual marine photographic project in an underwater environment. The project will take place in the Caribbean
as part of a multidisciplinary experience. This course is repeatable **Fee: There is an additional
cost for the study abroad class** and **Note: Travel will be taking place during Intersession,
course will be scheduled Spring term** (Prerequisites: PHPS-322 or equivalent course.) Lab
3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHPS-350 
Topics in Photographic Sciences
The photographic sciences and its educational offerings are in a constant state of growth due to
rapid changes in technological applications and capabilities. Topics in Photography will provide students with the opportunity to explore this shifting terrain of photographic imaging. The
content taught in this course will change frequently and the course may be repeated for credit,
however each particular “Topic” may have limits on repeatability. (Prerequisite: PHPS-202 or
equivalent course and at least 3rd year standing in PHBM-BS or IMPT-BS or PHIMTEC-BS.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

96	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHPS-351 
Studio Topics in Photographic Sciences
The photographic sciences and its educational offerings are in a constant state of growth due
to rapid changes in technological applications and capabilities. Studio Topics in Photography
will provide students with the opportunity to explore laboratory applications in this shifting
terrain of photographic imaging. The content taught in this course will change frequently and
the course may be repeated for credit, however each particular “Topic” may have limits on
repeatability. (Prerequisite: Successful completion of two of the following courses is required
PHAR-201, PHAR-202, PHAR-203 or PHAR-204.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PHPS-498 
Photography Internship
The photography internship will provide students with the option to work in the photographic
or visual communications field. Students may apply for internships to businesses based on the
availability of positions and business job needs. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Internship Permission Form to enroll. **Note: No more than 6 credits
of internships can be applied towards their degree** (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHPS-499 
Cooperative Experience
At least one cooperative or internship experience is required of all Photographic and Imaging
Technologies students for graduation. Co-ops are an opportunity for students to gain experience in their field and are generally completed between their second and third academic years.
The RIT Office of Cooperative Education and Career Services assists students in identifying coop placements and opportunities. Co-ops are typically paid work experiences and can be either
part-time (10-15 hrs/wk) or full-time (min 35 hrs/wk). All Co-ops must fall within an RIT term
(fall, spring, summer). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHPS-599 
Photography Independent Study
Photography independent study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty advisor
will propose a course of study. Photography idependent sudy students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. **Note:
Students can only earn up to 6 credits of independent study towards completion of their
degree** (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Liberal Arts

College of Liberal Arts
Index
ANTH	Anthropology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 97
COMM	Communication.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 100
CRIM	 Criminal Justice .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 103
ECON	Economics .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 104
ENGL	English. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
FNRT	 Fine Arts.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 110
MLAR	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 113
MLAS	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 114
MLCH	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 114
MLCU	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 115
MLFR	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 115
MLGR	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 115
MLIT	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 116
MLJP	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 116
MLPO	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 117
MLRU	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 117
MLSP	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 117
MLST	 Foreign Languages .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 118
HIST	History. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 118
ITDL	 Interdisciplinary-Liberal Arts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 121
INGS	 International and Global Studies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 122
MUSE	 Museum Studies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 122
PHIL	Philosophy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 123
POLS	 Political Science .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 126
PSYC	Psychology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 128
PUBL	 Public Policy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 131
STSO	 Science, Technology and Society. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 131
SOCI	Sociology .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 132
WGST	 Women and Gender Studies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 134

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Anthropology
ANTH-102 
Cultural Anthropology
This course explores how human beings across the globe live and work according to different
values and beliefs. Students will develop the tools for acquiring knowledge, awareness, and
appreciation of cultural differences, and in turn enhance their abilities to interact across cultures. The course accomplishes these aims by examining the relationship between individuals
and their communities, and the dynamics of ritual, religious, political, and social life in different parts of the world. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-102H 
Honors Cultural Anthropology
Anthropology is the holistic science of the human condition, and professional anthropologists engage in experiential, empirical and humanistic research. Cultural diversity and change
are explored through the anthropological techniques of immersion (ethnographic fieldwork)
and cross-cultural analysis. In-depth and comparative analysis of critical issues may include
transnational migration, ethnic nationalism, racism, changing and clashing views on gender
and sexuality, indigenous peoples’ rights, religious fundamentalism, genocide, war, hunger,
famine and cultural and economic dimensions of globalization. The specific topic varies from
year to year. (Honors Students) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

ANTH-103 
Archaeology and the Human Past
Archaeology is the study of the human past, from the origin of our species through to the development of modern, industrial states by means of the physical remains of past human behavior.
In studying the past, archaeology seeks to explain how we, as modern humans, came to be.
This course investigates how archaeologists study the past, explains how human society has
changed over time, and presents an overview of world prehistory. Specific topics include the
evolution of modern humans, the peopling of the world, the development of agriculture, the
rise of state-level societies and associated social technologies such as writing and urbanism.
Case studies will be used throughout to demonstrate how archaeological research is conducted and how archaeologists use their research to formulate explanations of the past that have
relevance for the present. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-210 
Culture and Globalization
This course explores critical issues of globalizing culture. How are ideas, attitudes, and values
exchanged or transmitted across conventional borders? How has the production, articulation, and dissemination of cultural forms (images, languages, practices, beliefs) been shaped
by global capitalism, media industries, communication technologies, migration, and tourist
travels? How are cultural imaginaries forged, exchanged, and circulated among a global consumer public? How has the internationalizing of news, computer technologies, video-sharing
websites, blogging sites, and other permutations of instant messaging served to accelerate
cultural globalization? Students will be introduced to anthropological perspectives on cultural
globalization, the transmission of culture globally, and the subsequent effects on social worlds,
peoples, communities, and nations. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or INGS-101 or
minimum of 2nd year level standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-215 
Field Methods in Archaeology
This course introduces students to the methods of archaeological fieldwork. The course begins
with the student’s development of a research question and design. We then explore the feasibility of this research through the examination of sampling techniques, site survey, and excavation.
Field methods of recording, photography and artifact conservation will also be discussed.
Students will be able to analyze the usefulness of the field techniques in light of the archaeological scientific methods for dating, and organic and inorganic analyses. Students should emerge
from the course understanding the values of the techniques necessary for proper archaeological
excavation towards the reconstruction of the past and the development of an understanding
of our present. Lab, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-220 
Language and Culture
This introductory course in linguistic anthropology surveys the great variety of ways humans
communicate both verbally and non-verbally with an emphasis on cross-cultural communication. The course explores the complex interplay between language and culture. Language is
a core element of culture, both as a repository of meaning, and also because it is the primary
means through which humans carry out social relationships, share ideas, and contest received
understandings. Topics will vary by semester, and may include: metaphor and narrative; language acquisition in relationship to childhood socialization; language, thought and worldview;
language and identity; multilingualism; the social contexts of language change; literacy; and the
politics of language use and language ideologies. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-225 
Globalizing Africa
This course introduces students to processes of interconnection, local, regional, national and
global, that have altered and continue to impact life in Africa, taking into account the enormous
impact of Africans on one another and on those of us living outside of the continent. In the
course, we will focus on how past, present and anticipated future events in African movements
of people, ideas and things, across time and space effect the reception of new events. We will
pay particularly close attention to how the relationships of time and space are formulated and
understood by Africans in the present. While the historical past is never completed, but continuous in the present, its diverse contours lead to differently remembered, embodied, and enacted
expressions. We will evaluate these diverse expressions in pre-colonial, colonial and neo-colonial encounters as they have changed ideas of self and other, political philosophies and political
economic systems, genders and sexualities, generational relations, religions, expressive arts,
violence, and health on the African continent and around the globe. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-230 Archaeology and Cultural Imagination: History, Interpretation & Popular Culture
People have been interested in their ancestors and the lives of past people likely for as long as
we have been human. But this interest has rarely been disinterested. People have exploited,
destroyed, or ignored the remains of previous societies. And how the past is understood has
profound effects that ripple through all of society, at different times influencing group identity,
political philosophy, art, architecture, literature, and film. The emergence of scientific archaeology in the last 150 years has created its own cultural references, including Indiana Jones and
Lara Croft. Each semester this course is offered, a specific topic will examine the cultural context in which archaeologists do their work, what is made of their efforts, and how these are
related to larger issues in society. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

97

College of Liberal Arts

ANTH-235 
Immigration to the U.S.
This course examines immigration to the U.S. within the context of globalization. We examine
the push- and pull-factors that generate immigration, and changing immigration policies and
debates. We consider how changes in the American workplace have stimulated the demand for
foreign workers in a wide range of occupations, from software engineer to migrant farmworker
and nanny. We review the cultural and emotional challenges of adapting within the American
cultural landscape; transnationalism and connections with the homeland; the experiences of
refugees; and how immigration has changed since 9/11. Special attention is given to immigration from Latin America, the largest sending region. Lecture, Credits 3
ANTH-245 
Ritual and Performance
The world’s cultural diversity is most vividly and dynamically displayed through ritual and
festival. Ritual is anything but superfluous; rather, some of the most important “work” of
culture is accomplished through the perfor-mance of ritual. Through cross-cultural comparison, by way of readings and films, we explore the following dimensions of ritual: symbols,
embodiment, emotion, discipline, contestation of tradition and authenticity, and the orchestration of birth, childhood socialization, gender, maturation, marriage, community, hierarchy,
world renewal, and death. Written expression is enhanced through drafting, revision, and peer
review. Lecture, Credits 3
ANTH-250 
Themes in Archaeological Research
One of the most fascinating dimensions of archaeology is the discovery that people have done
essentially the same things in different places and different times, independently of developments elsewhere. Agriculture, writing, urbanism, complex economies, and so on, all have been
independently invented multiple times in different parts of the world. This fact raises some
intriguing questions about what it means to be human. By comparing how these developments
occurred in different places and times, archaeologists can, in a sense, perform experiments
on the past. Each semester this course is offered we will focus on a separate theme in archaeological research, such as the transition to agriculture; production, trade, and exchange; the
origin of writing; imperialism, colonialism, and warfare; pseudoscience/pseudoarchaeology;
or human evolution. We will study competing theoretical perspectives and different world
regions to gain a broad understanding of the theme and how both theory and data are used to
create a comprehensive understanding of the human past. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-255 
Regional Archaeology
Since the first humans set out from Africa nearly two million years ago, our ancestors and relatives managed to settle in almost every continent. Wherever they went, they left traces of their
lives that are tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of years deep. We call these traces
the archaeological record. Almost everywhere our ancestors settled, they did many of the same
things, such as inventing agriculture, cities, writing, and state-level societies. However, they
did this in ways unique to each region and time. This course examines the archaeology of a
specific region, such as Mesopotamia, Mesoamerica, North Africa, or East Asia, in detail. We
examine the geography, culture, archaeological record, and significance of the region to various key themes in archaeological research. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-260 
Native North Americans
This course will examine persistence and change in Native American cultures using archaeological, ethnohistorical, ethnographic, linguistic and autobiographical sources among others.
In addition to broad regional and historical coverage, we will read about and discuss culture
change, colonialism, federal law, gender, race and places in Native American contexts. Our
goal is to understand the lived experiences of Indian people and the many forces that shape
Native American lives. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-265 
Native Americans in Film
This course will examine the parallels of anthropological works and resulting Government policies in the late-19th and 20th centuries as they relate to the genre of Native Americans film,
both popular and ethnographic works. In addition, an extensive regional and historical literature review will complement the possible films. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-270 
Cuisine, Culture and Power
Physically, culturally, and socially, humans live through food and drink. Spanning the globe, as
nearly limitless omnivores, humans have developed myriad ways of collecting and cultivating
food and taking advantage of local environments. We also put food to work for us socially by
creating cuisine. Through cuisine, we forge and nourish relationships, commune with deities,
and through luxury choices, demonstrate our "taste" and lay claim to elite status. Through the
cultural practices of production and consumption of food and drink, we wield power. Food
and drink consumption patterns have sustained slavery, poverty, malnutrition, and illegal
immigration, and have laid waste to the environment. In this class, we explore physical, cultural, social, political, and economic dimensions of food and become more aware of how the
private, intimate act of a bite connects us to the rest of humanity. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

98	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ANTH-275 
Global Islam
This course examines the spread of Islam beyond its origins in the Middle East, and the cultural
and social clashes, but also the mutual adjustments that have followed. This course explores
core tenets of Islam, but also how its practices and beliefs are altered as practitioners in different countries alternately adopt, co-opt, massage, react to, and reject elements in accordance
with the meaningful social, cultural, and political lives they build for themselves. The compatibility of Islam with Western society is often debated in contemporary public discourse. This
debate is typically marked by an assumption that Islamic beliefs clash with Western secular
democratic ideals, an assumption which results in tensions over mosque building, headscarves,
and other public signs of Islamic faith. We will explore the diverse ways of being Muslim from
a cross-cultural perspective and the sometimes-challenging negotiation of fulfilling these religious tenets while living in Muslim-minority places. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-280 
Sustainable Development
The international economic system (capitalist) has demonstrated extraordinary power in distributing goods to the farthest reaches of the globe. At the same time there is an increase in
inequality and in the numbers of poor and hungry, often associated with environmental degradation. These changes are especially obvious in cities, but not limited to them. Since 1987,
building on the work of the Brundtland Commission, there has been a concerted effort by the
United Nations, by non-governmental organizations, by individuals, and by some nationstates to explore paths of more sustainable development. This course explores varied strategies
now employed to achieve sustainable development, with particular attention to less developed
countries. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-285 
American Indian Languages
This course is about the indigenous languages of the Americas generally and how they have
been studied. Students learn how these languages have been classified, about their history, about
their structural and typological attributes, about language contact among these peoples, about
writing systems, and about the sociolinguistic and cultural contexts in which the languages are
spoken. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-290 
Language, Sex, and Sexuality
This course explores the relationships between language, gender, sex and sexuality. We will
investigate the language used by members of sexual minority groups, discuss how sexual orientation shapes language use, and examine the role of language in the social construction of
sexual identity. We will focus on several aspects of the language used by and about gay men,
lesbians, and bisexual and transgendered people. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-301 
Social and Cultural Theory
This course explores influential classical and contemporary theories regarding society and culture. Students will assess the utility of different theories in addressing key enduring questions
regarding human behavior, the organization of society, the nature of culture, the relationship
between the individual and society, social control and social conflict, social groups and social
hierarchy, the operation of power, cultural and social change, and the interplay between the
global and the local. Theories will be marshaled to shed light on contemporary social and
cultural phenomena and problems such as crime, violence, exploitation, modernity, and globalization. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or ANTH-103 or SOCI-102 or SOCI-103
or INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-302 
Qualitative Research
Learning about social and cultural groups is a complex and ethically sensitive process. In this
course, we explore common qualitative research methods for social and cultural research. We
evaluate the utility of such methods for different purposes and contexts, including cross-cultural contexts. We consider common ethical dilemmas in research with human subjects, the
ethical responsibilities of researchers, and common techniques for minimizing risks to subjects. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or ANTH-103 or SOCI-102 or SOCI-103 or
INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
ANTH-303 
Quantitative Research
The research conducted by sociologists and anthropologists generates large, complex data sets
that are difficult to interpret subjectively. Multivariate quantitative methods are an important
tool for understanding these data. This course presents an introduction to quantitative research
in sociology and anthropology: how to craft a research question and research design that utilize
quantitative data, how to select appropriate quantitative techniques and apply them, how to
present results, and how to critically evaluate quantitatively based knowledge claims. Topics
include: research design, collecting and cod-ing data, non-metric data, data screening, exploratory data analysis, selection and use of appropriate analysis techniques, comparing groups,
exploration of variance, classification, and modeling. The course features laboratory exercises
and a final project in which the student selects a research problem and data set, which they
analyze and present to the class. . (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or ANTH-103 or
SOCI-102 or SOCI-103 or INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3

College of Liberal Arts

ANTH-305 
Investigating Language Change
This course explores traditional and contemporary approaches to historical linguistics, the
study of language change. All languages change through time, but how they change? where
these changes come from? In this course, we compare different languages, different dialects
of the same language, or different historical stages of a particular language, and investigate the
history of languages and also language groups (or families). We investigate hypotheses about
the grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation of languages long dead, and explore how languages can give us insights to understanding human prehistory. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

ANTH-340 
Divided Europe
As Europe strives for political and economic unity, we see a concurrent push toward inequality,
exclusion, and marginalization: minorities, immigrants, refugees, Blacks, Muslims, Jews, Roma
or Sinti, and women struggle against discrimination. Not only the legacy of colonialism but
the revitalization of nationalism shape contemporary European cultural politics. Based on an
anthropological perspective, this course examines ways in which we can understand a divided
Europe through the intersections of race, ethnicity, class, gender, and religion. (Prerequisites:
INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ANTH-312 
People Before Cities
More than half the global population today lives in densely populated urban areas, which
are further surrounded by complex networks of smaller communities. Yet, the earliest cities
appeared less than 6,000 years ago, a small fraction of time since our species’ first appearance.
The characteristics that define us as human were forged in radically different social universe
from those of today. We lived our lives among not much more than 20-30 other people at any
one time, hunting and gathering our food, and occasionally moving from place to place. This
lifestyle was so successful and adaptable it endured pressures from more complex societies
well into the 20th century. Understanding what life was like in such these small-scale societies is important because the material and social world in which they lived is the foundation
for societies where food production, social hierarchy, and occupational specialization are the
norm. This course will examine both the ethnographic and archaeological record of hunter/
foragers from around the globe in an attempt to understand how it proved to be such a versatile
and resilient way of life and how its successes, in fact, laid the foundation for social inequality,
complexity, and food production. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ANTH-345 
Genocide and Post-Conflict Justice
The destruction and survival of societies often hinges upon the ideas and the social, cultural
constructions of identity and belonging. When ideas fail to incorporate people, essentialist
categories of identity, historical memory, and accounts of extreme violence become interrelated, potent sources of destruction. Slavery and exclusive ownership of resources leave people
starving or living in perilously polluted environments. Globalizing cultural economies threaten
local systems and self-representation. Group identities may be "sites" of crises within nationstates and global political, economic and cultural processes. In this course, we will take critical,
anthropological approaches to studies of ethnocide, genocide and post-conflict justice. Students
will use critical, anthropological approaches to assess ethnocides and genocides from the 19th
century forced assimilation and slaughter of Native Americans and Amazonian Indians to more
recent genocides in Cambodia, Bosnia, Rwanda, and the Sudan, to understand the impact of
globalization on techniques and technologies of genocides, the legal, moral/personal responsibility for genocides, media representations of genocides, and the affects of cultural, historical
memory and social, global inequities upon future genocides. Students will use anthropological
perspectives on genocide to assess post-conflict concepts of justice, reconstruction and reconciliation and local-global debates about their cultural resonance and effectiveness. (Prerequisites:
INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

ANTH-315 
The Archaeology of Cities
The long course of the human existence has been marked by a series of revolutions that have
profoundly changed society and that ultimately produced the world we live in today. One of
the key revolutions that made our world possible was the invention of urbanism. Cities first
appeared in Mesopotamia about 6,000 years ago and since then have been independently
invented in many different parts of the world. This course focuses on the pre/historical trajectories of urban development in different world regions, the multiple roles of cities, and their
impact on the development of complex societies. We attempt to understand and explain how
the city has developed and contributed to the constitution of modern society. Throughout the
course we will work on developing a working definition of the city that encompasses urbanism in all its many forms. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-325 
Bodies and Culture
This course examines the body in culture, society, and history. The course material draws
on comparative approaches to the cultural construction of bodies, and the impact of ethnic,
gender, racial ideologies on body practices (i.e. surgical alteration, mutilation, beautification,
surrogacy, erotica). We will critically investigate the global formation of normative discourses of the body (regarding sexuality, AIDS/illness, reproduction, fat/food) in medical science,
consumer culture, and the mass media. The course will be discussion, writing, and project
oriented, encouraging students to acquire a range of analytic skills through a combination of
text interpretation and research. (Prerequisites: INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-330 
Cultural Images of War and Terror
This course critically examines the visual culture of war and terror in a global world from an
anthropological perspective. Representations of violence are endlessly transmitted on television, on the internet, in print media, in cinema, and recreational games to become part of our
everyday visual culture. Whether disseminated as news, documentary truth, or entertainment,
the ubiquitous encounters with images of violence require a new form of visual literacy that
not only highlights the intersection of the local and the global, but also recognizes the ways in
which visual technologies, cultural politics of memory and history, media practices, and national ideologies intervene in the formation of a visual culture of war and terror. (Prerequisites:
INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-335 
Culture and Politics in Latin America
This course introduces cultures of Latin America and the Spanish-speaking Caribbean in the
context of political and economic forces that have shaped them. We examine Spanish and
Portuguese colonialism and its modern-day legacies, including ethnic inequalities, economic
vulnerability, and social unrest. We look at how art, music, and literature have engaged critically with the forces of fascism, revolution, socialism, dictatorship, and neo-colonialism. We
consider indigenous activism, religious diversity, changing experiences and expectations of
women and men, rebellion and revolution, impacts of and creative responses to globalization,
and Latinos in the U.S. Lecture, Credits 3

	

ANTH-350 
The Global Economy and the Grassroots
Economic globalization has given birth to global, grassroots social movements. This course
examines how global economic integration is brought about through multilateral institutions,
multinational corporations, outsourcing, trade agreements, international lending, and neoliberal reforms. We consider impacts (cultural, economic, and health) of these trends on employees,
farmers, small businesses, consumers, and the environment in the developed and developing
worlds (with special emphasis on Latin America). We examine beliefs, alternative visions, and
strategies of grassroots movements responding to these challenges. (This class is restricted to
undergraduate students with at least 2nd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3
ANTH-360 
Humans and Their Environment
Humans and their societies have always been shaped by their environment, but as human
societies became more complex, their relationship with their environment changed from one
of simple adaptation to one in which they had the power to change their environment. Often,
the changes they have wrought have had unintended consequences, forcing societies to adapt
to the changes that they themselves have brought about. Although we tend to think that this is
a relatively recent phenomenon, humans have been altering their environment since the first
human societies made the transition to agriculture over ten thousand years ago, if not longer. In this class, we will use the tools of environmental archaeology to explore the history of
human interactions with their environments and to draw lessons on how we could manage
that interaction today. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-370 
Media and Globalization
This course examines the cultural importance of mass media in the context of globalization.
By analyzing the global flows of media images across national borders, emphasis is given to the
cultural, social, and political impact of global media culture on communities in different parts
of the world. How, for example, do mass media represent or shape cultural values and beliefs
in developing societies? What is the role of mass media in forging national and ethnic identities, body images, cultural constructs of sexuality and gender, and the perceptions of war and
violence in different societies? (Prerequisites: INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-375 
Native American Repatriation
NAR addresses issues surrounding cultural objects, contested ownerships, repatriation, reparations, legal compliance, museum technologies and the ever-changing role of repositories.
This course facilitates experiential learning including work with the Rochester Museum and
Science Center. Lectures, round-table discussions, and instruction are provided by museum
professionals, nationally renowned speakers, and Native American representatives. At the conclusion of this course students will comprehend the breadth of federal legislation regulating
human remains and objects of cultural patrimony, the complex legal and social issues facing
museums and communities, and the opportunities that exist as NAGPRA enters into its third
decade since ratification in 1990. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

99

College of Liberal Arts

ANTH-385 
Anthropology and History
This course evaluates the relationship between anthropology and history — a relationship that
is not always self-evident because of cultural anthropology’s focus largely on living peoples and
cultures and history’s emphasis on the past. The careful analysis of select texts will serve to raise
critical questions concerning the theoretical and methodological similarities and differences
between the two disciplines as well as the potential contributions of anthropology and history
to critical scholarship and writing. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in Anthropology
(ANTH), Sociology (SOCI) or History (HIST) is required.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-390 
Marxist Perspectives
This course will provide a critical analysis and historical overview of the Marxist tradition in
anthropology and sociology. Special attention will be given to comparing the various Marxist
schools as well as outlining the neo-Marxist project and its importance for a cultural refiguration of Marxist perspectives in the social sciences. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H
or SOCI-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
ANTH-410 
Global Cities
This course examines the impact of global dynamics on cities from the early twentieth century to the present. By tracing urban formations from metropolis to global city, emphasis will
be placed on the making of identities, communities, and citizens in the architectural spaces,
cultural places, ethnic zones, and media traces of urban life in the context of globalization.
(Prerequisites: INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-415 
Archaeological Science
Archaeology is one of the few social sciences that lends itself well to the application of analytical
techniques from the physical sciences. This is due to the fact that archaeology relies primarily
on physical evidence; artifacts and features, whose origin, composition, age, manner of production can be elucidated through application of the physical sciences. This course examines
the application of physical science techniques to archaeological questions, including the age
and origin of materials; how things are made; what people ate; their daily activities; and their
state of health throughout their life. The course will include in-class labs in which students have
the opportunity to apply some of these techniques and a final research project in which the
student picks their own archaeological question to answer. Lab 2, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
ANTH-425 
Global Sexualities
This course explores issues of gender and sexuality in a global context. Students will be introduced to anthropological perspectives on the experience of men and women, as gendered
subjects, in different societies and historical contexts such as colonialism, nationalism, and
global capitalism. In turn, we will explore how cultural constructions of masculinity and femininity are configured by race, class, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Course materials are
drawn from an array of sources, reflecting various theoretical perspectives and ethnographic
views from different parts of the world. (Prerequisites: INGS-101 or ANTH-102 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-430 
Visual Anthropology
We see others as we imagine them to be, in terms of our values, not as they see themselves.
This course examines ways in which we understand and represent the reality of others through
visual media, across the boundaries of culture, gender, and race. It considers how and why
visual media can be used to represent or to distort the world around us. Pictorial media, in
particular ethnographic film and photography, are analyzed to document the ways in which
indigenous and native peoples in different parts of the world have been represented and imagined by anthropologists and western popular culture. (Prerequisites: INGS-101 or ANTH-102
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ANTH-435 
The Archaeology of Death
Death and burial are how most individuals enter the archaeological record. Human remains,
their manner of mortuary treatment, and associated material culture illuminate past patterns
of social organization, economics, belief systems, health, and the negotiation of gender, status, and identity. In this course we explore the scientific and theoretical tools used to analyze
and interpret past mortuary practices, survey mortuary practices from their first occurrence
in the archaeological record to the relatively recent past, and what human remains can tell us
about changes in the human experience over time and space. We will learn how human remains
are identified, how determinations of age, sex, biological affiliation, health, and injury are
made; how to interpret formation processes and determine if burial is deliberate, accidental,
or forensic, to interpret associated material culture to understand the negotiation of gender
and status; how humans have cared for the deceased members of their societies at different
times and places in the human past; and the ethics of studying human mortuary remains. The
archaeology of death provides us with one of our few windows onto the life of the individual
in the past. (None) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

100	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ANTH-455 
Economics of Native America
This course will analyze current and historic economic issues faced by Native Americans. It
will also examine government policies enacted by and directed toward Native Americans with
a focus on their economic implications. This will be done using standard economic models
of the labor market, poverty, trade, development and gaming. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-489 
Special Topics
This course introduces a topic new to the Sociology and Anthropology curriculum. Topic varies by semester. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ANTH-498 Practicum
Students will apply the accumulated knowledge, theory, and methods of the discipline to problem solving outside of the classroom. The Practicum may consist of internship, study abroad,
or archaeological or ethnographic field school (consisting of at least 160 hours, completed
over at least 4 weeks). (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year
standing.) INT, Credits 0 - 16 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ANTH-499 Co-op
Paid work experience in a field related to anthropology (at least 160 hours of work, completed
over at least four weeks). Students will apply the accumulated knowledge, theory, and methods
of the discipline to problem solving outside of the classroom. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ANTH-501 
Senior Research Project
Students will design and conduct a library-based research project with supervision of a faculty
member, bringing to bear the knowledge and theoretical perspectives accumulated during the
prior years of study. (Prerequisites: ANTH-201 or ANTH-301 or ANTH-302 or ANTH-303 or
equivalent courses and 4th year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ANTH-599 
Independent Study
The student explores in depth a topic of choice, under supervision of a faculty member. The
student will typically meet weekly with the instructor to discuss the readings and will write
paper(s) that synthesize and critique them, or the student may work with the faculty member
on original research. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 12 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Communication
COMM-101 
Human Communication
An introduction to the theoretical and conceptual underpinnings of oral, visual and written
communication. Introduces basic communication models, the role of language in communication, symbols and symbol making, issues of audience analysis and the development of different
modes of discourse. Also explores the history of communication and introduces students to
basic principles and research in communication studies. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-142 
Introduction to Technical Communication
This course covers the history of technical communication - from medieval treatises to the
explosion of technical communication following WW II - and its development as a profession
and academic discipline. Also, the course introduces students to current best practices in written and visual technical communication, including software applications, as well as principles
and practices of ethical technical communication. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-201 
Public Speaking
The public speaking course is designed to equip the student with knowledge of the theories
and principles necessary for formal public speaking. Informative and persuasive speeches are
the focus with emphasis on organization, evidence, language use, strategy, delivery, and effective use of media aids. Public speaking is generally offered each semester. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-202 
Mass Communications
The history and development of U.S. media, theoretical aspects of mass communications,
the composition of media audiences, law and regulation of mass communications and how
the media affect and are affected by society are presented. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
COMM-203 
Effective Technical Communication
This course provides knowledge and practice of written and oral communication skills generally required in technical professions. Focus is on individual and group writing and speaking
tasks. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

COMM-211 
Principles of Advertising
An introduction to principles and practices of advertising. Topics include advertising theories,
ethics, regulation, consumer research, media planning, message strategy and campaign planning strategy. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-212 
Public Relations
An introduction to the practice of public relations (PR). Topics include history, research areas,
laws, ethics, and social responsibilities as they relate to the theory and practice of PR. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-221 
Public Relations Writing
This course covers a variety of forms of writing for public relations, including news releases,
newsletters, backgrounders, public service announcements, magazine queries, interviews, coverage memos, media alerts, features, trade press releases, and public presentations. Students
will write for a variety of media including print, broadcast, and the Web. Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
COMM-223 
Digital Design in Communication
In an increasingly visual culture, and culture of online user-created content, non-designers
are called upon in the professional realm to illustrate their ideas. Graduates entering the workforce will encounter situations where they will benefit from possessing a visual communication
sensibility and vocabulary to communicate effectively with a broad range of audiences, including professional designers. Creative approaches to challenges, such as visual thinking, are also
shown to improve students’ comprehension and problem-solving abilities. Digital Design in
Communication is an opportunity for undergraduates to receive an introduction to principles
of visual message design from a critical rhetorical perspective. They will also get the opportunity to apply these principles to a variety of visual products such as advertisements, logos,
brochures, resumes, etc. A variety of computer software applications are available to support
the research, writing, visualization, and design of messages. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-253 Communication
An introduction to communication contexts and processes emphasizing both conceptual and
practical dimensions. Participants engage in public speaking, small group problem solving
and leadership, and writing exercises while acquiring theoretical background appropriate to
understanding these skills. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-261 
History of Journalism
This course presents the history of American journalism from colonial times to the present,
including the advance of press freedom under the First Amendment and how it has affected
the development of American media. The influences of Europe, colonial politics in America,
national expansion, urbanization, war, and technology are further developed. Journalism’s
relationship to politics, institutions and culture will be investigated. Newspaper, magazine,
and broadcast industries will be examined for ideas that have changed American journalism.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-263 
Computer-Assisted Reporting
This course covers how to report on, illustrate, find and analyze records and databases, with
emphasis on investigative reporting. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-271 
Introduction to Journalism
The course covers the impact/effect of journalism on American society, with an introduction
to the history, freedom, technologies, ethics, and functions of the news media. Students will
learn how to assess news value, develop news judgment, and analyze news stories. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-272 
Reporting and Writing I
This course introduces students to the principles and practices of gathering, evaluating, investigating, and presenting information to general audiences. Rights and responsibilities of the
press will be analyzed. Although special emphasis will be given to writing and reporting for print
publications, other media will be addressed. Special attention will be given to the qualities of
writing, especially organization, accuracy, completeness, brevity, and readability. Assignments
must conform to Associated Press style. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-273 
Reporting and Writing II
Practicum in advanced techniques of news gathering, reporting, and writing, with an emphasis on reportorial principles and practices. This class expands upon the processes of gathering,
evaluating, investigating, and presenting information to news media audiences previously
introduced in newswriting. (Prerequisites: COMM-272 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)

	

COMM-274 
News Editing
This course introduces students to the principles and practices of editing hard news and feature articles, including news judgment, story selection, headline writing, copy editing, and
picture editing. The course emphasizes reader interest, readability, clarity, verification, and
style, as well as legality, ethics, and propriety. (Prerequisites: COMM-272 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-301 
Theories of Communication
An introduction to human communication theory, including a history of the field and major
theories from the intrapersonal, language, interpersonal, small group, public, organizational, mass, visual, and computer-mediated communication contexts. Theories based both in
the humanities and the social sciences are covered. (ADVPUB-BS,PTCOMM-BS,COMMBS,JOURNAL-BS) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-302 
Interpersonal Communication
Interpersonal communication provides analysis and application of the major theories of interpersonal communication in various situations. The course focuses on perception of self and
others, language use, nonverbal communication, and symbolic interaction in the communication of shared meanings in face-to-face and mediated interpersonal relationships. There is
a strong focus on both conflict management and intercultural interactions. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall)
COMM-303 
Small Group Communication
This course provides students with opportunities to engage in small group decision making
and problem solving. Students will analyze and evaluate their own experiences and relate
them to theories and research from the field of small group communication. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
COMM-304 
Intercultural Communication
Intercultural communication provides an examination of the role of culture in face-to-face
interaction. Students may find a basic background in communication, anthropology, or psychology useful. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-305 Persuasion
An in-depth study of the theories, practices, effects, and ethics of persuasion. Persuasion is
defined as human communication designed to influence one’s beliefs, values, attitudes, and
actions. This course examines persuasion from a receiver-oriented perspective with interpersonal, small group, organizational, and mediated perspectives. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
COMM-306 
Rhetoric of Race Relations
Rhetoric of Race Relations examines the history of the struggle for freedom and equality for
blacks in American society. This course traces the history and rhetoric of key spokespersons
from the pre-Civil War period to the 20th century as evidenced in texts of selected public
speeches and reactions to them. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-321 
Copywriting and Visualization
An opportunity for undergraduates to learn the verbal and visual skills utilized in the creation of advertising messages. To create an effective strategy for an advertising campaign, the
advertising copywriter/art director team needs to combine linguistic and visual metaphors
into a persuasive message. Students will develop creative advertising messages by researching
and writing a creative brief and then implementing the plan by transforming concepts into
actual advertising messages and campaigns. (Prerequisites: COMM-211 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-322 
Campaign Management and Planning
This course introduces students to the managing and planning of advertising & public relations campaigns. It takes a team project approach thereby helping students learn how to work
together in class as well as in a competitive agency. Service-learning will be used to expose students to community causes. (Prerequisites: COMM-211 and COMM-212 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-341 
Visual Communication
This course is an introduction to the study of visual communication. The iconic and symbolic
demonstration of visual images used in a variety of media is stressed. The major goal of the
course is to examine visual messages as a form of intentional communication that seeks to
inform, persuade, and entertain specific target audiences. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-342 
Communication Law and Ethics
This course examines major principles and trends in communication law. The course analyzes a broad range of issues related to the First Amendment, intellectual property, and media
regulation. Special attention is paid to discussing the major ethical perspectives and issues surrounding contemporary communication behavior. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

101

College of Liberal Arts

COMM-343 
Technology-Mediated Communication
Technology-mediated communication (TMC) was originally defined as a form of electronic
written communication. As networking tools advanced, TMC expanded to include new software
developments, such as instant messenger and the Web. Today, the term technology-mediated
communication is used to refer to a wide range of technologies that facilitate both human communication and the interactive sharing of information through computer networks. Through
readings, discussions, and observations of online behavior, students will be introduced to TMC
terms and theories to further develop their TMC communication and critical thinking skills.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-344 
Health Communication
An introduction to the subject of communication in health care delivery and in public health
campaigns, with an emphasis on interpersonal, organizational, and mass communication
approaches. Also covered is the interrelationship of health behavior and communication.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-345 
Ethics in Technical Communication
Ethics is the study of morals, of what is right and good, especially regarding specific moral
choices. In a given situation, a system of ethics helps us answer the question: What should I do?
Ethics in technical communication explores the ways in which ethical conduct is important in
the communication of technical information, particularly among professional technical communicators; establishes principles, based on the history of ethical studies, for making ethical
choices as technical communicators; and provides opportunities to apply ethical principles to
case studies, in order to better understand the often problematical nature of ethical choices in
technical-or any-communication. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-346 
Global Media
An introduction to media technologies from a global perspective. Major theories about the
media, current trends in media, journalism practices, and governmental challenges and restrictions are reviewed. Students will use various media technologies both locally and abroad
through site visits, readings, and online resources resulting in a media production (minidocumentary, movie trailer, and/or international film review). Special focus on the growing
importance of the Internet and digital media on news flow, advertising, and entertainment.
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
COMM-356 
Critical Practice in Social Media
With the advent of virtual communities, smart mobs, and online social networks, questions
about the meaning of human communication and how we construct our online and offline
personal and professional identities need to be reevaluated. This course explores the relationship between social media and the construction of both individual and social identities as well
as best practices for constructing the desired community or identity. Although the course is
grounded in theory, it is equally committed to practice, and much of the class discussion and
activity takes place in various online spaces. As a practicum, those who complete this course
will know how to engage productively in practices such as tweeting, blogging, tagging, etc. and
will develop an understanding of how these practices affect their construction of identity and
community both personally and on behalf of an organization. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-357 
Communication, Gender, and Media
This course examines the relationship between gender and media communication with specific
attention to how gender affects choices in mass media and social media practices. Students
explore how gender, sexual orientation, sexuality and social roles, affect media coverage, portrayals, production and reception. They consider issues of authorship, spectatorship, (audience)
and the ways in which various media content (film, television, print journalism, advertising,
social media) enables, facilitates, and challenges these social constructions in society. The course
covers communication theories and scholarship as it applies to gender and media, methods of
media analysis, and topics of current interest. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-361 
Reporting in Specialized Fields
An in-depth study, analysis, and practicum of a selected advanced and focused subject in professional journalism. Specific subject matter of the course varies according to faculty assigned
and is published when the course is offered; students may enroll in this class no more than
twice as long as the specific subject matter is different. Examples include education journalism,
health journalism, business journalism, reporting public affairs, sports journalism, editorial (or
opinion) writing, and reporting for alternative media. (Prerequisites: COMM-272 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-362 
Law and Ethics of the Press
This course examines major principles and trends in communication law. The course analyzes a broad range of issues related to the First Amendment, intellectual property, and media
regulation. Special attention is paid to discussing the major ethical perspectives and issues surrounding contemporary communication behavior. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

102	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

COMM-401 
Quantitative Research Methods
An introduction to the methods and ethics of scientific, scholarly communication research
including methods of locating, analyzing, critiquing and conducting communication research.
The course focuses on empirical research methods and leads to the development of a research
project proposal suitable for implementation in senior thesis in communication. (Prerequisites:
COMM-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
COMM-421 
Media Planning
An introduction to developing, executing, and managing media plans for advertising & public
relations. This course covers the characteristics and uses of advertising media, media terms and
calculations, media strategies and tactics, and media plan development and implementation.
(Prerequisites: COMM-211 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-440 
Visual Communication of Technical Information
This course introduces students to the principles, conventions, and ethics of communicating
technical information in graphs, tables, and illustrations. A secondary focus is on writing text
to complement graphs and illustrations in technical documents. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-441 
Writing the Technical Manual
Develops in students those skills necessary for designing, writing, and editing long technical
manuals. Special emphasis is given to graphics and page layout. Students enrolling should
have command of concise English prose. (Prerequisites: ENGL-361 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-461 
Multiplatform Journalism
The Internet is an important source of news information, rivaling print, radio, and television
news. This course introduces students to the principles and practices of online news reporting,
including writing for mainstream news sites, journalistic blogs (Web logs), share and discussion
sites, and other evolving online news outlets. The course familiarizes students with the tools
of the online reporter: for example, vetting sources on the Web, conducting e-mail interviews,
and writing for Web pages. Also, students explore the cultural and ethical terrain unique to the
wired environment. (Prerequisites: COMM-272 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
COMM-489 
Special Topics in Communication
An in-depth examination of a selected aspect of the communication discipline (e.g. strategic
communication, technical communication, visual communication, computer mediated communication, advertising, public relations, journalism). Special Topics in Communication can
be taken multiple times, provided the topic being studied has changed. Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Spring)
COMM-497 
Communication Portfolio
Communication and advertising & public relations majors create a portfolio comprised of projects, papers, and related professional materials; Journalism majors complete a senior project.
Near the end of every semester, the department hosts a portfolio review day when department
of communication seniors present their portfolio or project work in a public space for review
and comment by faculty, staff, and peers. The presentation constitutes completion of the course.
(Prerequisites: At least 4th year student standing in ADVPUB-BS, PTCOMM-BS, COMM-BS
or JOURNAL-BS.) Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
COMM-499 
Communication Co-Op
One semester of paid work experience in a professional setting related to the communication major. (ADVPUB-BS,PTCOMM-BS,COMM-BS,JOURNAL-BS) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
COMM-501 
Senior Thesis in Communication
A guided research seminar culminating in a major project that brings together the communication students’ communication studies and substantive work in his or her professional
core. Focuses on designing, conducting and completing an independent research project. The
progress of each project is shared with the class for discussion and critiques. (Prerequisites:
COMM-401 or equivalent course and student standing in ADVPUB-BS, COMM-BS or
PTCOMM-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
COMM-503 
Advanced Public Speaking
Further development of knowledge and skills learned in public speaking. This course emphasizes language, delivery, and speech organization, requiring stu-dents to develop and deliver
speeches for various occasions, using a variety of delivery methods. Students will present outof-the-classroom speeches as well as practice ghostwriting. (Prerequisites: COMM-201 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
COMM-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an
independent study are provided in College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent Study,
Credits 1 - 12 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Liberal Arts

Criminal Justice
CRIM-100 
Seminar in Criminal Justice
This seminar acquaints students with key resources for understanding and conducting criminal justice research. The course involves extensive reading, writing, and discussion. It covers
the principles of the criminal justice system including the relationship between system components, their effectiveness, and theories of operation and reform. Consideration is also given
to specific problems within the branches of the criminal justice system. (CRIM-BS) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-110 
Introduction to Criminal Justice
This course provides an introduction to criminal justice. One of the primary goals of this
course is to provide a general understanding of how the criminal justice system responds to
crime in society. The main component parts of the criminal justice system (i.e., police, courts,
and corrections) will be examined with a particular emphasis on developing an understanding of the behavior and interactions among the main actors in the criminal justice system. To
accomplish this goal, we will examine how criminal cases are processed in the criminal justice
system. We will also consider how external forces, such as political decisions, public opinion,
and the media influence criminal justice decision-making. Students will also formulate, argue,
and evaluate ethical perspectives regarding criminal justice systems, individual-level decisions,
and recognize relationships with other ethical problems in society. Finally, throughout the
course we will emphasize how the societal response to crime has evolved over time. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CRIM-120 
Criminology, Social Justice, and Community Action
Understanding criminology and social justice embodies a study of the social, cultural, and
institutional responses to and effects of inequality in our society; this courses focuses upon
the Rochester, NY area. The course allows students to explore issues of social justice, develop
skills in social analysis and critical thinking, and apply those skills to develop criminal justice
strategies to address at least one policy issue that each student identifies during the course.
The course explores the relationship between poverty and inequality with racial and ethnic
discrimination. It also provides rigorous intellectual engagement and experiential learning
through a structure that includes: (a) Foundation in social justice; (b) experiential activities
to observe efforts to address social injustice and their effects; and (c) develop critical thinking about efforts to address social justice issues and the effect criminal justice policies have on
communities. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Int)
CRIM-210 
Technology in Criminal Justice
Develops understanding of theories, management processes, organizational capabilities and
social implications of criminal justice technologies. Many categories of technology are considered, ranging from communications and records management, to special assault and protection
tactics. Students consider the role of industry, government, and user groups in the historical
development and legal/ethical use of specific technologies. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-220 Corrections
Introduction to the basic organizations of the correctional system, their functions and performance. Prisons and jails, as well as probation and parole agencies, are discussed with
the context of historical and contemporary philosophy. Attention also is focused on decision-making functions, the role of various personnel within the correctional system and the
population of offenders within it. Strategies for rehabilitation and their effectiveness are surveyed. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-225 
Criminal Law
Criminal Law deals with the substantive and procedural criminal law. Characteristics of crimes
against people, property, and the state will be examined. Emphasis will be placed on the nature
of criminal conduct, the requirement of criminal intent, and legal causation. In addition, the
principal defenses will be examined. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
CRIM-230 
Juvenile Justice
This course examines the concepts, theories and environmental influences of juvenile offenders, the impact of the judicial system, control and corrections on juvenile justice. The course
also examines the role of forces in the system including police, courts, community resources and treatment. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

CRIM-235 
Crime, Justice and Communities
This course provides an overview of the role of communities in crime and criminal justice.
The course begins by laying a foundation in community theory. Students will gain an understanding of the critical dimensions and attributes which define community. From here the
course will emphasize how these critical community dimensions are related to both crime and
criminal justice. We will discuss the extent to which structural characteristics (e.g., poverty,
residential mobility, etc.) and social processes (e.g., social capital, collective efficacy, etc.) are
related to crime and disorder. The course will also examine the potential that exists within
criminal justice to intervene in communities to reduce crime and disorder and build community in the process. Central to this will be a discussion of co-production (i.e., the intersection
between formal and informal social control). The remainder of the course will examine how
the major components of criminal justice (i.e., police, courts, and corrections) have attempted
to intersect with communities. These topics will include community policing, comprehensive
community initiatives, community problem-solving, community prosecution, restorative justice, and community corrections/offender re-entry. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-240 
Law Enforcement in Society
This course examines the social and historical origins of the various police systems; police culture, role and career; police in the legal system; social and legal restraints on police practices;
police discretion in practice; police and community; police organization and community control mechanisms. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
CRIM-245 
Prostitution and Vice
This course will examine prostitution and vice in the United States and globally. Through
empirical scholarship, various issues will be examined including issues faced by sex workers including crime, victimization, health and safety, and law and policy issues. Quality of life
issues for communities will also be examined. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-250 
Domestic Violence
This course focuses on domestic violence in the United States and globally. Various types of
domestic violence will be examined, including intimate partner violence, child abuse, and elder
abuse. The course will also examine criminal justice responses to domestic violence, including police, court processing of domestic violence cases and punishment of domestic violence
offenders. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CRIM-255 
Seminar on Sexual Violence
This course focuses on sexual violence in the United States and globally. Various types of sexual
violence will be examined, including incest, elder abuse, and male victimization. The course
will also examine criminal justice responses to sexual violence, including police, court processing of sexual violence cases and punishment and treatment of sexual offenders. (Prerequisites:
CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CRIM-260 Courts
This course provides students with an understanding of the recognized functions of courts in
the American criminal justice system. Jurisdiction, policies and procedures of courts in the
administration of criminal justice, including trial and appellate courts, will be discussed. Courts
will be examined at the local, state and federal levels. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-265 
Women and Crime
This course deals with women as criminal offenders and as victims of crime, focusing upon
theories about women in crime, types of crimes committed, patterns of criminality and the
treatment of women offenders. Also examines the role of women as law enforcement officers,
judges, lawyers and correctional officers in the criminal justice system. (Prerequisites: CRIM110 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-270 
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
This course involves yearlong participation in, and written critique of, a designated set of
lectures, roundtables and presentations on topics covering current issues in criminal justice.
The goal is to engage students in discussion of current issues with their peers and with experts
in the field. (Prerequisites: CRIM-100 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Spring)
CRIM-275 
Crime and Violence
This course focuses on the outbreak and prevalence of violent crime in the United States as
one of the most important social realities of the past 100 years. In addition to a historical
review, we will also scrutinize contemporary problems associated with violence. These problems include street violence, terrorism, riots, vigilantism, and how the criminal justice system
has attempted to control these problems. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

103

College of Liberal Arts

CRIM-285 
Minority Groups and the Criminal Justice System
This course will investigate the roles played by racial minorities- African-Americans, Native
Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans-- at each level of the criminal justice
system in the United States of America and globally. The experience of African Americans
will be emphasized since this group has been the subject of more extensive research by criminologists and criminal justice practitioners. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-290 
Computer Crime
This course provides definitional, theoretical, and operational context for understanding computer-based competition, conflict and crime in the information age. Students study the history,
nature and extent of computer-related crime, as well as differing types of computer criminals,
their motivations and the methods they use to threaten, attack, compromise or damage physical and cyber assets. The course considers legal and regulatory environments and the impact
these have on policies and practices related to ethics in the management of information security, data encryption, privacy, and numerous other special topics. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-299 
Crime, Justice and Ethics
This course provides an introduction to ethical theories, consideration of justice as operationalized in contemporary criminal justice and emerging issues that accompany technological
advancements such as video surveillance. Students will explore how ethical frameworks are
embedded, implicitly and explicitly, in fundamental questions that are resolved by police,
judges, and prosecutors. Conceptions of justice and criminal justice will be considered as they
relate to criminological and criminal justice theories such as Procedural Justice/Legitimacy
theories, Restorative Justice, as well as rationales for punishment. Implications for evaluation
of technological changes in criminal justice will also be considered from the perspectives of
ethical choices. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-300 
Quantitative Methods for Criminal Justice
This course is designed to provide students with a foundation in social science research methods. Through lecture, discussion and activities associated with a research project, emphasis is
placed on the creation of null hypotheses, identification of the relationships among variables,
establishment models, and analysis of data using both parametric and non-parametric statistics. Required course for criminal justice majors. (Prerequisites: CRIM-100 and CRIM-110 or
equivalent course and at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-315 Evidence
Provides the student with an awareness of what types of evidence are admissible in a criminal
trial. Includes a comprehensive analysis of the most frequently used rules of evidence. There
are readings and discussions pertaining to the nature of real, testimonial, hearsay and circumstantial evidence. Examines rules concerning the cross-examination of witnesses, exceptions
to the exclusion of hearsay evidence, the burden of proof, the provinces of the judge and of
the jury, legal presumptions and the exclusion of illegally obtained evidence. (Prerequisites:
CRIM-215 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
CRIM-350 
Theories of Crime and Criminality
A comprehensive survey of historical and contemporary theories of the causes of crime.
Included are theories that derive from biological, psychological, sociological, geographic, economic, and political perspectives. Development of criminological theory reviewed; fundamental
distinctions between classical and positivist theories and between theories of crime and criminality discussed. (Prerequisites: CRIM-100 and CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-400 
Research Methods
This course is designed to provide students with a foundation in social science research methods. Through lecture, discussion and activities associated with a research proposal, the different
methods of conducting research are presented. Stress is on issues of deducting hypotheses from
theoretical frameworks, variable construction, experimental design, sampling methodology
and the techniques and methods of data collection. Students will formulate a written research
proposal that details a research question and the research question and the research design
appropriate for addressing that question. (Prerequisites: CRIM-300 and CRIM-350 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
CRIM-489 
Major Issues in Criminal Justice
Focuses on contemporary issues and topics not otherwise distinctly incorporated in established
criminal justice courses. Concentrates on student discussion and interaction surrounding
required readings on topics such as crime prevention and issues in the prosecution/court
system. Recent examples include cyberlaw, prisoner re-entry restorative justice, wrongful convictions, crime mapping, crime analysis, non-traditional courts, legal controversies in the law,
substance abuse, and legal research. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

104	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CRIM-500 
Seminar in Criminal Justice and Public Policy
This course provides an overview of the public policy process as it relates to issues of crime and
criminal justice. Students will gain an understanding of the socio-political context of criminal justice public policy, the public policy process, and the challenges facing successful policy
implementation that are unique to criminal justice. The beginning of the course will emphasize
public policy designed to control or limit the behavior and discretionary decisions of criminal
justice officials. The remainder of the course will emphasize public policy designed to enhance
the control, supervision, and processing of criminal offenders. (Prerequisites: CRIM-400 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CRIM-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a regular classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an independent study are provided in College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6

Economics
ECON-100 
Foundational Seminar in Economics
This course is designed to introduce new students in the Economics program (freshmen and
external and internal transfers) to the application of economic analysis in academia, business,
government and the not-for-profit sector. Students will be exposed to the research and consulting activities undertaken by academic economists and economic practitioners as well as a
discussion of the career outcomes of the alumni of the RIT Economics program. (ECON-BS)
Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall)
ECON-101 
Principles of Microeconomics
Microeconomics studies the workings of individual markets. That is, it examines the interaction of the demanders of goods and services with the suppliers of those goods and services.
It explores how the behavior of consumers (demanders), the behavior of producers (suppliers), and the level of market competition influence market outcomes. Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
ECON-101H 
Honors Microeconomics
This course introduces students to some of the important questions addressed in
Microeconomics and the methodology used to address these questions. We will look at some
of the basic models of consumer and firm behavior and study how implications are derived
from these. We will also see how some of these simple models give insight into diverse questions such as: Should food stamps be given away freely to those who are poor, or should they
be required to purchase them? Why are general practitioners (as opposed to specialists) disproportionately located in smaller towns? Why do firms bundle goods rather than just selling
them separately? As far as the final impact is concerned, is there a difference in whether a tax
is imposed on the sellers of a product or on buyers of a product? Microeconomics gives the
tools to understand and evaluate implications of government as well as business policy decisions. In addition, it provides the foundation for the study of many other sub-disciplines in
economics. (Honors Students) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ECON-201 
Principles of Macroeconomics
Macroeconomics studies aggregate economic behavior. The course begins by presenting the
production possibilities model. This is followed by a discussion of basic macroeconomic concepts including inflation, unemployment, and economic growth and fluctuations. The next
topic is national income accounting, which is the measurement of macroeconomic variables.
The latter part of the course focuses on the development of one or more macroeconomic models, a discussion of the role of money in the macroeconomy, the aggregate supply-aggregate
demand framework, and other topics the individual instructor may choose. (Prerequisites:
ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ECON-401 
Intermediate Microeconomic Theory
This course develops the tools that are commonly used to study the allocation of resources in
a private enterprise economy. Topics covered include the theory of consumer behavior, cost
and production, and alternate market structures. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or ECON-101H
and MATH-161 or MATH-171 or MATH-181) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

ECON-402 
Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory
The central question of macroeconomics is the determination of output, employment and
prices. This course develops models which incorporate behavioral assumptions concerning
consumption, investment, and the role of money and their relationship to macroeconomic
variables. Macroeconomics, unlike microeconomics, has been in a constant state of flux during the 20th and into the 21st century. Theories which purport to explain macroeconomic
behavior have come into and gone out of fashion depending upon institutional changes and
external factors. This course will primarily focus on examining four macroeconomic theories;
the Classical, Keynesian, Monetarist, and New Classical models. In addition, macroeconomic
public policy will be analyzed in the context of recent economic history. This analysis will be
extended to consider open economy macroeconomics in a global context. (Prerequisites: ECON101 and ECON-201 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ECON-403 
Econometrics I
Econometrics I provides students with the opportunity to develop their skills in applied
regression analysis. It covers various regression estimation techniques, data preparation and
transformation, and the interpretation of regression results. There is particular emphasis on
the dangers of misuse of regression techniques. The course covers regression analysis for
both cross-sectional and time series data. (Prerequisties: (ECON-101 or ECON-101H) and
(MATH-171 or 1016-171T or MATH-181 or MATH-181A) and STAT-145 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECON-405 
International Trade and Finance
This course first surveys the sources of comparative advantage. It then analyzes commercial
policy and analyzes the welfare economics of trade between countries. Some attention is paid
to the institutional aspects of the world trading system. Finally, the course introduces the student to some salient notions in international finance such as national income accounting, the
balance of payments, and exchange rates. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ECON-406 
Global Economic Issues
This course is focused on understanding economic problems in a global perspective. The students will study the impact of globalization on economic growth and income disparity among
countries. Global economic issues such as poverty, hunger, refugees, and transnational terrorism will be studied. We will also discuss global efforts to attain progress such as the United
Nations Millennium Development Goals. The course work will emphasize the analysis of international economic data. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Spring)
ECON-407 
Industrial Organization
The study of the structure, conduct and performance of contemporary American industry.
Involves the application of the tools of microeconomic analysis and empirical evidence to
aid in understanding the behavior of modern industry. In addition, the course considers the
historical determinants of contemporary market structure and the public policy measures
designed to preserve a competitive market structure. The course concludes with an examination of alternative intellectual property rights mechanisms and how alternative mechanisms
impact firm-level and economy-level innovation rates. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECON-421 
Natural Resource Economics
This course develops an economic perspective on one of the most important and challenging issues facing global society: the allocation, use, and preservation of natural resources. The
course presents and discusses the methodology economists use to inform natural resource
managers and policy makers. Economic thought and analysis are used to evaluate a variety
of issues in this area. The course concludes with a brief discussion of the interdisciplinary
aspects of natural resource management. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECON-422 
Benefit-Cost Analysis
Benefit-Cost Analysis fosters better understanding of the efficiency consequences of governmental micro-economic actions, both regulatory and fiscal. The course explores the logic, value
and limitations of benefit-cost analysis as a public policy tool commonly used, and misused, in
comparing the relative merits of alternative government actions. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ECON-430 
Managerial Economics
Managerial Economics involves the application of economic theory to business decision-making. Most of the emphasis is microeconomic in nature, the theory of the firm and consumer
theory, but there is some macroeconomic influence, particularly in the forecasting area. Since
this is an applied economics course, it has a strong quantitative flavor. (Prerequisites: ECON101 and ECON-201 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

ECON-431 
Monetary Analysis and Policy
This course is a study of monetary behavior and the role of monetary institutions in the modern economy. The primary focus of the course is upon understanding how money plays a role
in individual decision making units (i.e., households and businesses) and ultimately affects the
macroeconomy (e.g., output, employment and inflation). The first part of the course begins
with a discussion of economic methodology including introduction to regression analysis and
an overview of money and the financial system; the course then proceeds to a discussion of
interest rates, portfolio analysis and exchange rates. The second part of the course considers
how money affects the macroeconomy by discussing the money supply process and considering
theories which explain how changes in the money supply affect the economy. (Prerequisites:
ECON-101 and ECON-201 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
ECON-432 
Open Economy Macroeconomics
Open economy refers to an economy that interacts with other economies. Therefore, open
economy macroeconomics studies how these interactions affect economies at the aggregate
level. The main objective of this course is to analyze how exchange rates affect an economy in
both the short run and the long run. This course also examines the role of government and central banking systems in affecting macroeconomic policy in an open economy. (Prerequisites:
ECON-101 and ECON-201 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Biannual)
ECON-440 
Urban Economics
Urban economics is the application of economic analysis to spatial relationships in densely
populated (urban) areas. The course develops economic models that explain the existence and
growth of cities; the location behavior of consumers and businesses in cities; and the economic rationale and effects of zoning and growth controls. The course then applies the insights
gained from these models to a number of urban issues. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
ECON-441 
Labor Economics
Labor Economics encompasses aspects of human involvement in the production & distribution of goods and services. We will examine models of behavior starting with the supply of and
derived demand for labor. Through the course, we will investigate questions such as: What
determines the amount an individual earns for their labor? What are the benefits associated
with attaining a college degree? Is the minimum wage an effective policy tool? Is there convincing evidence of discrimination in the work place? (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
ECON-444 
Public Finance
Public Finance is the study of the microeconomics of the public sector. The course fosters better understanding of the scale, scope and results of government spending and taxes. The focus
is on economic efficiency in resource allocation and fairness in the distribution of income
and wealth. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
ECON-445 
History of Economic Thought
A survey of the various schools of thought that have developed in economics From Aristotle to
the present. Representative economists from each of the major schools (Pre-Classical, Classical,
Marxian, Neo-Classical, Keynesian, Monetarist, etc.) are studied. (Prerequisites: ECON-101
and ECON-201 or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ECON-448 
Development Economics
This course provides an introduction to development economics, which focuses on the problems and challenges faced typically but not exclusively by the developing countries. In this
course we will study the economic transformation of developing countries by focusing on the
characteristics of land, labor and credit markets in rural areas of developing countries. We will
survey the large literature on modeling economic growth and discuss relevant case studies from
developing countries. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECON-449 
Comparative Economic Systems
This course mainly involves a comparative analysis of the structure and performance of different economic systems. The two major economic systems studied are market capitalism and
command socialism. In the first part of the course, students are introduced to the economic
decision-making processes in the two systems, including the economic structure, operation and
relative efficiency in achieving its macroeconomic goals. In the second part, several examples
from the world economy which lie on a spectrum between pure market and pure command
systems are comparatively discussed and evaluated. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
ECON-450 
Health Care Economics
Examines the economics of health care, the organization of its delivery and financing, and analyzes access to care issues, the role of insurance, the regulation of hospitals, physicians, and
the drug industry, the role of technology, and limits on health care spending. (Prerequisites:
ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

105

College of Liberal Arts

ECON-451 
Economics of Women and the Family
This course applies economic theory to explain choices faced and selected by women concerning marriage, fertility and labor market participation, alongside government policies targeting
those decisions. Empirical research will be presented that describes the changing demographic
profile of families, poverty and the labor force. Students in this course will gain experience evaluating how economic theory and practice fits into the larger social sciences goal of describing
human behavior by focusing on women and the family. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECON-452 
Economics of Native America
This course will analyze current and historic economic issues faced by Native Americans. It
will also examine government policies enacted by and directed toward Native Americans with
a focus on their economic implications. This will be done using standard economic models
of the labor market, poverty, trade, development and gaming. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ECON-453 
Behavioral and Experimental Economics
Over the past few decades, Experimental and Behavioral Economics have become two of the
fastest growing and exciting fields of economics. This course will provide students with an
introduction to many interesting concepts in both fields. In doing so, students will learn how
experimental methodology can be used to provide insights about economic behavior in the
areas of market exchange and strategic decision making. Additionally, students will be exposed
to interesting topics in Behavioral Economics including: biases and heuristics, decisions under
risk and uncertainty, inter-temporal choice, social preferences, bounded rationality, and learning. The concepts and methods covered in this course will be primarily illustrated by presenting
recent experimental and theoretical studies, running in-class experiments, and by participating in group projects. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ECON-499 
Economics Co-op
Students will have an opportunity to gain one semester of work experience in a professional
setting related to the Economics major. Department approval is required. Class 0, Credit 0 (F,
S, Su) (ECON-BS) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ECON-501 
Directed Research in Economics
This course is designed to allow Economics students to pursue research under the direction
of an Economics faculty mentor. Prior to enrollment in this course the student must submit a research proposal to the proposed faculty sponsor and the Economics Department for
approval. Once approved, the faculty sponsor in consultation with the student will determine
the number of credit hours (1-3) which will be assigned for the course. The completed research
project will be presented at the annual COLA Undergraduate Research Conference. (ECONBS) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3

ECON-520 
Environmental Economics
This course examines the relationship and apparent conflict between economic growth and
environmental quality, the economics of environmental issues and policy, the environment
as a resource and a public good, and the ability and lack of ability of free markets and the government to deal adequately with pollution and other environmental problems. (Prerequisites:
ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

English
ENGL-150 
FYW: Future of Writing
This First Year Writing Intensive course is designed to develop first-year students’ proficiency
in analytical writing, rhetorical reading, and critical thinking by focusing on particular uses
of narrative. Students will read, understand, and interpret a variety of texts representing different cultural perspectives and/or academic disciplines. Increasingly, scholars, artists, public
figures and other professionals recognize the value of using stories across genres to inform
analytical practice. Students will gain informed practice in using narrative in different disciplines, and become aware of storytelling as one among a number of rhetorical strategies for
inquiry. Students will be expected to give presentations as well as write papers both in response
to the reading material and in services of their own independent arguments. (Prerequisite:
Student must have an SAT Verbal Score greater than or equal to 560 or an ACT English Score
of 23 or more or a Writing Placement Exam score of 2 or higher.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
ENGL-210 
Literary and Cultural Studies
Students will study literary and cultural texts selected from traditional literature to contemporary media and culture (including mythology, poetry, plays, novels, film, graphic novels,
television, and digital literature). Students will analyze these texts from a variety of perspectives
and become familiar with the history of debates about literature and/or culture as arenas of
human experience. Individual sections will vary in their foci. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
ENGL-211 
Introduction to Creative Writing
This course gives students the opportunity to write in different creative genres such as fiction, non-fiction, and poetry. In producing a portfolio, students will learn concrete elements
of craft and techniques of improvisation to generate creative work. The course uses peer feedback, workshops, and collaborative brainstorming to develop and refine texts for the printed
page and beyond. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

ECON-502 
Honors Economic Independent Research
This course is designed to allow Economics students who are in the Honors Program to conduct independent research under the guidance of a faculty mentor. Prior to enrollment in this
course the student must submit a research proposal and the name of the proposed faculty
mentor to the Economics Department for approval. Once approved, the faculty mentor in consultation with the student will determine the number of credit hours which will be assigned to
the course. The completed research project will be presented at the annual Economics/Public
Policy Undergraduate Research Conference. (ECON-BS) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3

ENGL-215 
Text and Code
We encounter digital texts and codes every time we use a smart phone, turn on an app, read an
e-book, or interact online. This course examines the innovative combinations of text & code
that underpin emerging textual practices such as electronic literatures, digital games, mobile
communication, geospatial mapping, interactive and locative media, augmented reality, and
interactive museum design. Drawing on key concepts of text & code in related fields, students will analyze shifting expressive textual practices and develop the literacies necessary to
“read” and understand them. Practicing and reflecting on such new media literacies, the course
explores their social, cultural, creative, technological, and legal significance. To encourage multiple perspectives on these pivotal concepts of text & code and their import, the course includes
guest lectures by scholars and practitioners in these fields. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ECON-503 
Econometrics II
Econometrics II builds on skills in applied regression analysis by exploring advanced regression
estimation topics including panel data estimation, Instrumental Variable and Two-Stage-LeastSquares estimation, simultaneous equation models, limited dependent variable models, and
advanced time series topics. (Prerequisites: ECON-403 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Biannual)

ENGL-216 
Literature From Around the World
Offering a representation of literature from at least three continents and intending to be introductory in nature, this course will explore literature drawn from a variety of cultures. Literature
from Around the World will explore the nature, function and value of literature from a global
perspective: students will become familiar with world literatures, as well as methods of studying literature and culture across national boundaries. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

ECON-510 
Economics Capstone Experience
This course registers the student’s completion of the capstone experience required for
Economics majors. The requirement can be fulfilled by either presenting a class paper at an
approved on-campus or off-campus research conference or submitting a solo-authored or coauthored research paper to a peer-reviewed journal. Economics students experience conducting
research and presenting their findings before an audience of their peers and professionals in
the field. Students are sponsored by a faculty member, developing their pre-professional skills
while learning how to do research first hand. Double-majors who satisfactorily complete a capstone experience in their primary major automatically fulfill the Economics capstone experience
requirement. (This class is restricted to students with at least 2nd year standing in ECON-BS.)
Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ENGL-301 
The Art of Poetry
This course emphasizes the enjoyment and study of poetry with primary attention to major
poetry in English. Students will develop (and apply) a working vocabulary of the concepts
and terminology used to discuss and analyze poetry, through close readings of individual
poems, lectures on specific poets, and theories of poetics. Part of the literary and cultural
studies immersion and minor; the creative writing minor; and may also be taken as an elective. Fulfills a perspectives requirement in the artistic and social categories. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

106	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ENGL-302 
The Short Story
The short story has been one of the most dynamic and innovative genres in literature. This
course uses the genre of the short story to provide material for critical commentary and cultural understanding. Students read a variety for short stories to develop and understanding of
the form and its impact on culture. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Liberal Arts

ENGL-304 
Drama and Theatre
From Oedipus Rex to Hamlet dramatic characters have come to represent human archetypes
for millennia. Drama captures both current sociological trends and the universal everyman.
In this course students will explore the literary elements that comprise the genre of Drama.
Drama is the only literary art that requires an extra step to come to full expression. Playwrights,
unlike the novelists or poets, create their work to be performed by others. In this course, students will read a selection of plays and discuss questions of historical relevance, reception, and
ask why this form of literature has been so enduring and socially potent. Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL-307 
Mythology and Literature
This course explores the cultural, historical, social, spiritual, literary and performative dimensions of world myth. These interdisciplinary analytical approaches will inform our exploration
of the effects of these narratives on literature and other kinds of cultural texts, past and present.
We will also use myth to develop, and critically reflect on, comparative approaches to world
cultures. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-309 
Topics in Literary Forms
This course focuses on one literary form (some options include the short story, drama, poetry,
autobiographical literature, or the novel) and uses that genre to provide material for critical
commentary and cultural understanding. Criticism and theory appropriate to the genre will
be discussed as a way to understand the form, its social functions, and its cultural and political significance. The course can be repeated up to 2 times, for 6 semester credit hours, as long
as the topics are different. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-315 
Digital Literature
Since the initial development of the computer, writers have collaborated with programmers,
illustrators, and soundscapists to create digital literatures. Following from radical techniques in
print literatures such as concrete poetry, Choose Your Own Adventure novels, and reorderable/
unbound fictions, digital literatures exploit the potential of digital formats to explore questions
of interactivity, readership, authorship, embodiment, and power. In this class, we will learn to
analyze and appreciate digital literatures not simply through their content, but also through
the relation of content to form, media, programming platforms, and distribution formats. Our
consideration of digital literatures will lead us to cell phones, web pages, video games, virtual
reality environments, and genome sequencers. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENGL-316 
Global Literature
This course presents a study of global literature by engaging in critically informed analysis
of texts from different geographical regions or cultural perspectives. Students will discover new modes for thinking about what “global literature” is, and how globalizing impulses
have changed and shaped our world. One of the goals of the class is to analyze and discuss
the works in their respective socio-historical contexts, with a special focus on the theme of
encounter or “contact zones.” The impact of various factors such as migration, nationality,
class, race, gender, generation, and religion will also be taken into consideration. The course
can be repeated up to 2 times, for 6 semester credit hours, as long as the topics are different.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-318 
Popular Literature
From Horace Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto to J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter, forms of popular
literature have existed alongside more “literary” forms of narrative. In this course students will
focus on the distinguishing thematic, structural, and formal distinctions between popular and
literary fiction (and in some cases drama and poetry) with an awareness of the historical trends
that produced this distinction (the dime novel). The course may focus on popular forms either
within broader genres (such as fiction, drama, or poetry) or could be organized thematically and
use several of these larger genres. Some sub-genres may include, for example, detective fiction,
gothic and horror, the western, romance, etc. Analysis of popular treatment of certain themes
and ideas will give students a lens through which to understand how important social, political, and cultural issues enter into the popular imagination, and can in some cases become part
of ideological contestation through popular literary discourse. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-320 
Genre Fiction
Students will learn about foundational texts of genre fiction and the developments in the 20th
and 21st centuries. Genre is a category characterized by similarities in style, or subject matter.
Examples include Fantasy, Speculative Fiction, Fanfiction, Magical Realism, Historical Fiction,
or Science Fiction. The course approaches genre fiction as literary form, as cultural artifact,
and as philosophical speculation; students will learn to distinguish key features of genre fiction, including the historical inspiration as well as contemporary trends in genre fiction. This
course is part of the immersion and minor in Creative Writing and the English minor. It may
also be taken as an elective. The course may be taken up to two times for a total of 6 credit
hours, as long as the topics are different Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

ENGL-325H 
Honors English
A critical examination of themes, topics, theories and practices in a literary or writing studies
area associated with existing courses in the English curriculum, or with a special topics area. The
approach to this literary or writing studies topic will be specially geared to honors students and
others who wish to participate in a more in-depth and rigorous exploration of a literary or writing set of topics. Class 3, Credit 3 (F, S) (Honors Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-333 
The Rhetoric of Terrorism
This class examines the history of terrorism (both the concept and the term), definitions of
terrorism and attempts to explain the "root causes" of terrorism through rhetorical and ethical analysis of narratives written by historians, journalists, and terrorists themselves. Students
will read and discuss charters, manifestoes and messages ("terrorism texts") of domestic and
foreign, regional and global, non-state entities motivated by politics or religion to commit
violence, as well as the efforts of analysts to explain and contextualize their activities. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENGL-343 
Global Deaf Literature
This literature course explores the deaf elements in select literary works by deaf authors and
hearing authors from different societies around the world representing various literary periods and movements. This course begins with the study of ancient writings and laws about Deaf
people, documenting beliefs and values of earliest civilizations about Deaf people. Deaf culture
in world literature is largely described by preconceived notions and physiognomic descriptions
of Deaf people. Stories throughout world history are also characterized by varied responses
to emerging educational approaches. Significant advances in medicine, science, and technology in the 19th century changed conceptions of the moral and cultural values imposed on
Deaf people by hearing societies. This concept is explored through various literary lenses. The
course considers global literary tradition for new interpretations of Deaf experiences. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
ENGL-345 
History of Madness
This course will study the changes in definitions, explanations, and depictions of madness as
expressed in psychiatric texts, asylum records, novelists, cartoonists, artists, photographers,
filmmakers and patient narratives. Certainly, madness has assumed many names and forms:
the sacred disease, frenzy, hysteria, mania, melancholy, neurosis, dementia, praecox, schizophrenia, phobia, post-traumatic stress disorder. Those afflicted have been admired, pitied,
mocked, hidden from public view, imprisoned, restrained, operated on, hospitalized, counseled, analyzed, and medicated. The brain, particularly the disordered brain, has long been a
source of interest. This course explores the brain from the history of madness. The course takes
a humanist, rhetorical, and historicist approach to the question of madness within changing
social institutions and popular discourse. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENGL-345H 
History of Madness
This course will study the changes in definitions, explanations, and depictions of madness as
expressed in psychiatric texts, asylum records, novelists, cartoonists, artists, photographers,
filmmakers and patient narratives. Certainly, madness has assumed many names and forms:
the sacred disease, frenzy, hysteria, mania, melancholy, neurosis, dementia, praecox, schizophrenia, phobia, post-traumatic stress disorder. Those afflicted have been admired, pitied,
mocked, hidden from public view, imprisoned, restrained, operated on, hospitalized, counseled, analyzed, and medicated. The brain has long been a source of interest, particularly the
disordered brain. This course explores the brain from the history of madness. The course takes
a humanist, rhetorical, and historicist approach to the question of madness within changing
social institutions and popular discourse. (This class is restricted to students in the Honors
program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENGL-351 
Language Technology
We will explore the relationship between language and technology from theinvention of writing
systems to current natural language and speechtechnologies. Topics include script decipherment, machine translation,automatic speech recognition and generation, dialog systems,
computationalnatural language understanding and inference, as well as languagetechnologies that support users with language disabilities. We will also tracehow science and technology
are shaping language, discuss relevant artificialintelligence concepts, and examine the ethical
implications of advances inlanguage processing by computers. Students will have the opportunity toexperience text analysis with relevant tools. This is an interdisciplinarycourse and
technical background is not required. Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-353 Fantasy
This course provides a selective survey of fantasy from its antecedents in mythology, legend, and
folklore through its transformation through the 20th and 21st centuries. Topics may include the
development of the genre’s roots in mythology, the epic, and medieval Romance, and folklore
as well as diverse contemporary forms such as high fantasy, magical realism, urban fantasy,
new wave fabulism, and slipstream. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

107

College of Liberal Arts

ENGL-360 
Written Argument
This course will focus on academic writing specifically, the arguments presented in different
fields and professions about issues of significance. Students will learn about the rhetorical,
ethical, emotional, historical and logical elements of persuasion as they relate to written and
visual arguments and they will practice making claims, providing evidence, exploring underlying assumptions and anticipating counter-arguments as they relate to different audiences. In
addition to argument analyses, students will develop arguments of their own through inquirybased essays. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL-361 
Technical Writing
Provides knowledge of and practice in technical writing. Key topics include audience analysis;
organizing, preparing and revising short and long technical documents; designing documents
using effective design features and principles, and formatting elements using tables and graphs;
conducting research; writing technical definitions, and physical and process descriptions;
writing instructions; and individual and group peer editing. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
ENGL-373 
Media Adaptation
This course introduces students to the field of adaptation studies and explores the changes that
occur as particular texts such as print, radio, theatre, television, film, and videogames move
between various cultural forms and amongst different cultural contexts. The course focuses
upon works that have been disseminated in more than one medium. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENGL-374 
Games and Literature
Who studies game studies? Writing in games can often be hit or miss, so relying on an established story can provide support and allows the medium to evolve to cover more interesting
stories than the typical mass-offering affairs. Still, literature and games are fundamentally different media- and as such these differences must be accounted for when mapping literature onto
video games. Will “game studies” ever be as highly regarded as is critical scholarship on, say,
literature? Can a video game possess substantial literary merit? Can a video game offer the same
depth of characters and insight into the human condition as a novel? Do video games invite the
player to do the same things that works of great literature invite the reader to do: identify with
the characters, invite him to judge them and quarrel with them, and to experience their joys
and sufferings as the reader’s own? In this course we will have these conversations and then
go beyond. We will examine works that have visually evocative and varied settings; narratives
that make readers wonder what is going to happen next; and a rapidly changing culture that
prompts even more questions than it answers. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-375 
Storytelling Across Media
This course introduces the basic elements of narrative, reflecting on key concepts in narrative theory — such as story and plot, narration and focalization, characterization, storyspace,
and worldmaking — to enhance your understanding of how stories work and your ability to
understand how such storytelling strategies convey their meaning and themes. After an initial
exploration of storytelling traditions emerging from oral myth and short stories in print, we
expand our inquiries into what a narrative is and what it can do by considering what happens
to storytelling in graphic novels, digital games, and in recent electronic literature. Reflecting
on competing definitions and varieties of narrative, the course raises the overarching question
of why how we access, read, write, and circulate stories as a culture matters. Expect to “read”
stories in a variety of media, to review basic concepts and conversations drawn from narrative
theory, and to creatively experiment with the storytelling strategies we are analyzing in class.
No familiarity with specific print, digital, or visual media necessary, though a willingness to
read and reflect on stories in various media and to analyze their cultural significance will be
essential. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-376 
Experimental Writing
Is it true that literature makes nothing happen? Experimental writing is built on the opposite
assumption! This course introduces students to innovative texts that challenge our usual ways
of thinking about the relationship of language to the world: the cultural contexts within which
language functions, the conflicts out of which it arises, the aesthetic pleasures with which it
is associated, and the purposes — intentional or other — which it serves. Writing experiments can test boundaries and break limits, offering us ways to reconsider and redefine our
own experience — social, intellectual, emotional, spiritual. Moving from magic to modernity,
from monster to machine, we will explore the transformative power of experimental writing.
Students are expected to post weekly responses to the readings in Discussions on MyCourses,
work with a group to research and prepare a class presentation on a significant experimental
writer, and submit a final paper on a theme to be announced. Expect reading quizzes and a
take-home final exam. Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

108	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ENGL-381 
Science Writing
Study of and practice in writing about science, environment, medicine and technology for
audiences ranging from the general public to scientists and engineers. Starts with basic science writing for lay audiences, emphasizing writing strategies and techniques. Also explores
problems of conveying highly complex technical information to multiple audiences, factors
that influence science communication to the public, and interactions between scientists and
journalists. The course examines new opportunities for covering science (especially on the
internet), important ethical and practical constraints that govern the reporting of scientific
information, and the cultural place of science in our society. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-386 
World Building Workshop
This course focuses on the collaboration construction of fictional worlds. Students will learn
to think critically about features of fictional worlds, such as the social, political, and economic
structures that influence daily life for the characters who inhabit that world. Students will also
participate in extensive character development exercises, and then write short fiction from
these characters’ perspectives describing the challenges they face in these worlds. Students will
critique each other’s fiction and submit revised work.Each class will include considerations
of sophisticated fictional worlds in print and in other media and discuss world building features relevant to teach. (Prerequisites: Completion of First Year Writing (FYW) requirement
is required prior to enrolling in this class.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENGL-389 
Digital Creative Writing Workshop
This course is for students who want to explore the techniques of creative writing applied to
digital delivery formats. Through reading, discussion, and exercises, students will be exposed
to creative writing techniques that they will use to produce born digital writings. While reading/reflection and writing/revision will be emphasized all semester, the class focus will be on
the creation of creative works and the learning of stylistic and craft techniques. Ongoing work
will be discussed with peer editors, which will not only help students rethink their work but
teach them to become better editors. Group critiques will provide the opportunity to give and
receive helpful feedback. May be taken as a professional elective for communication majors;
part of the Creative Writing minor; part of the Digital Literature & Comparative Media minor;
and may also be taken as an elective. (Prerequisites: Completion of First Year Writing (FYW)
requirement is required prior to enrolling in this class.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-390 
Creative Writing Workshop
This course is for students who want to explore the techniques of a single genre of creative
writing and add to their skills as a creative writer. Through reading and discussion, students
will see their own writing in a larger context. Reading/reflection and writing/revision will be
emphasized all semester. The focus will be on the creation of creative works and the learning
of stylistic and craft techniques. Ongoing work will be discussed with peer editors, which will
not only help students rethink their work but teach them to become better editors. Group critiques will provide the opportunity to give and receive helpful feedback. Each class will rely
extensively on the creative writing workshop model, and will focus on a specific genre of printbased creative writing. The course may be taken up to three times for a total of 9 credit hours,
as long as the topics are different. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-391 
Dangerous Texts
This course will examine how suppression of information has been orchestrated throughout history in different contexts. The process of suppressing information “of people in power
attempting to hide images, sounds and words” must itself be viewed in perspective. We must
recognize acts of censorship in relation to their social settings, political movements, religious
beliefs, cultural expressions and/or personal identities. The texts that we will study were all
considered dangerous enough to be banned by governments. They are dangerous because they
represent sexuality, race, politics, and religion in ways that challenge the current political/cultural norms of their given culture. What, then, is so dangerous about a fictional representation?
What is it that makes a certain work dangerous at a particular time and how does this danger
manifest itself in stories, novels (print and graphic), and poetry? Studying these “dangerous
texts” and watching some “dangerous films” we will ask: what features of political and cultural regimes do artists tend to single out for criticism? What is the range of expressive tools
they use, including the contemporary context of digital media? What is it that makes intellectuals in general and imaginative writers in particular so potent a threat to established power?
Do issues like these matter only in totalitarian regimes, or can we learn something about the
book-banning pressures in our own society? How do social media technologies complicate discussions of censorship and creativity? Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-400 
Special Topics: Literary and Cultural Studies
A focused, in depth study and analysis of a selected topic in Literary and/or Cultural Studies.
Specific topics vary according to faculty assigned. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Liberal Arts

ENGL-409 
Mythology and Literature
This course is a scholarly investigation into the cultural, historical, social, psychological, religious and spiritual, literary and performative dimensions of world myth. It examines different
approaches to the study of myth emerging from disciplines such as anthropology, history,
literary studies, and psychology. Special attention will be paid to the effects of these narratives on literature and other kinds of cultural texts, past and present. We will also use myth to
develop, and critically reflect on, comparative approaches to world cultures. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-410 
Film Studies
This course familiarizes students with a number of different critical approaches to film as a
narrative and representational art. The course introduces students to the language as well
as analytical and critical methodologies of film theory and criticism from early formalist
approaches to contemporary considerations of technologies and ideologies alike. Students
will be introduced to a selection of these approaches and be asked to apply them to a variety of
films selected by the instructor. Additional screening time is recommended. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL-411 
Topics in American Literature
The course introduces students to American literature by tracing a particular theme through
a historical survey of canonical, non-canonical, and contemporary novels, stories, poetry, and
drama, as well as non-fiction forms (speeches, autobiographies, essays, etc.). Students will gain
a broad understanding of American literary trends while also gaining a deep understanding
of the given themes. These themes will be broadly conceived, but will also lend themselves
to social, cultural, and political questions. These themes may include but are not limited to
Horror, Gardens and Machines, Natives and Strangers, Borders, etc. While these themes deal
with abstract or conceptual ideas, they lead to questions about gender, race, ethnicity, empire,
and other historical problems in debates over American exceptionalism, empire, and ideology. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-417 
Deaf Literature
The major focus of this course is on "the image of the deaf and "the deaf experience" as depicted in literature. The course attempts to define "deafness" and the cultural roles it plays in both
texts by deaf authors and texts about deaf persons, as well as to examine particular literary
forms related to the deaf experience. Thus, attention is also given to studying ASL poetry.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-419 
Literature and Technology
Surveying the rise of computing technologies, information theories, and information economies
in the last century, this course considers their impact on literature, culture and knowledgeformation. In particular, we will reflect on topics such as the relations between social and
technological transformation, literary print and digital cultures and electronic literature.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL-421 
The Graphic Novel
This course charts the development of the graphic novel, examines that history in relation to
other media (including literary works, comics, film, and video games), and reflects on how
images and writing function in relation to one another. Primary readings will be supplemented with secondary works that address socio-historical contexts, interpretive approaches and
the cultural politics of the medium, such as representations of class, race, gender and ethnicity. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-422 
Maps, Spaces and Places
This course takes as its premise that spatial thinking is critically important. Spatial thinking
informs our ability to understand many areas of 21st century culture, as mobile interfaces and
geospatial technologies enable us to engage with our surroundings in new ways. The study
begins with a meditation on the language of maps and mapmaking, and how they work, and
explores the idea that to present a useful and truthful picture, an accurate map must tell lies.
The course develops into an exploration of the ways, particularly in texts, that mapmaking
creates cultural routes, mobile forms of ethnography, and ways of imagining travel and tourism in the era of globalization. The proliferation of location-aware mobile devices calls for
new understanding of space and networks of power, as we define public space and locational
privacy. The diverse writers, critics and filmmakers represented in this course are rethinking
space as a dynamic context for the making of history and for different organizations of social
and communal life. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-440 
Poetry Workshop
An exploration of the techniques of writing poetry in both open and closed forms. Professional
elective for professional technical communication majors. Part of the creative writing minor
and may also be taken as an elective. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

ENGL-441 
Fiction Workshop
This course instructs students how to become more precise, innovative, and accomplished
writers of literary fiction. Through creative exercises, peer critiques, and the reading and discussion of external stories, students will hone their critical faculties as well as their writing
skills. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-442 
Creative Nonfiction Workshop
This course is for students who want to understand and experiment with the genre of creative
nonfiction and to add to their skills as a creative writer. In this intensive workshop students will
explore the use of "I" as a guide, seek the extraordinary within the ordinary, and find the story
within the facts. Reading/reflection and writing/revision will be emphasized all semester. The
focus will be on the creation of several essays and the experimentation with style and subcategories of this fourth genre. Ongoing work will be discussed with peer editors, which will not
only help students rethink their work but teach them to become better editors. Through reading and discussion they will see their own writing in a larger context. Weekly group critiques
will provide the opportunity to give and receive helpful feedback. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-450 
Free and Open Source Culture
This course charts the development of the Free Culture movement by examining the changing
relationship between authorship and cultural production based on a variety of factors: law,
culture, commerce and technology. In particular, we will examine the rise of the concept of
the individual author during the last three centuries. Using a variety of historical and theoretical readings, we will note how law and commerce have come to shape the prevailing cultural
norms surrounding authorship, while also examining lesser known models of collaborative
and distributed authoring practices. This background will inform our study of the rapid social
transformations wrought by media technologies in last two centuries, culminating with the
challenges and opportunities brought forth by digital media, mobile communications and
networked computing. Students will learn about the role of software in highlighting changing
authorship practices, facilitating new business and economic models and providing a foundation for conceiving of open source, open access, participatory, peer-to-peer and “Free (as in
speech, not beer)” cultures. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-470 
Evolving English Language
What makes the English language so difficult? Where do our words come from? Why does
Old English look like a foreign language? This course surveys the development of the English
language from its beginning to the present to answer such questions as these. Designed for
anyone who is curious about the history and periods of the English language or the nature of
language change. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-472 
Special Topics: Writing Studies
A focused, in depth study of a selected topic in writing. Specific topics vary according to faculty
assigned. Part of the writing studies concentration and minor, the creative writing minor, and
the science writing minor depending on the topic offered. Topics will vary. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL-480 
Rhetoric of Science
Exploration of the many ways in which science employs modes of persuasion, and the ways it
does so differently in different cases of scientific work. Emphasis will be given to the conjunction between science and rhetoric; examples will be drawn from key figures and texts in the
history of science, ongoing controversies in contemporary scientific debates, the popularization of science in public media, and the representation of science in fiction. Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring, Summer)
ENGL-481 
Intro to Natural Language Processing
This course provides theoretical foundation as well as hands-on (lab-style) practice in computational approaches for processing natural language text. The course will have relevance to
various disciplines in the humanities, sciences, computational, and technical fields. We will
discuss problems that involve different components of the language system (such as meaning in context and linguistic structures). Students will additionally collaborate in teams on
modeling and implementing natural language processing and digital text solutions. We will
program in Python and use the Natural Language Toolkit and related tools (such as Weka).
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-482 
Science and Analytics of Speech
This course introduces students to the fields of experimental phonetics, the scientific study of
the sounds used in human speech, and speech processing, the study of the speech signal used
in automatic speech recognition, spoken emotion detection, and other technologies. Students
will learn about the physiology of speech production and perception, and they will acquire the
skills necessary to accurately describe speech concepts and to analyze speech using relevant
methods and tools. Turning to speech processing technology, students will explore automatic
speech recognition, speech synthesis, speaker identification, and emotion recognition, and
learn how our understanding of human speech production and perception informs these technologies. The course will have relevance to other disciplines in the humanities, sciences, and
technical fields. This course provides theoretical foundation as well as hands-on laboratory
practice. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

109

College of Liberal Arts

ENGL-490 
Advanced Creative Writing Workshop
This course is for students who want to explore the techniques of a single genre of creative
writing and have already completed a creative writing workshop. Through reading and discussion, they will see their own writing in a larger context, culminating in a substantial body
of work ready for publication. Reading/reflection and writing/revision will be emphasized all
semester. The focus will be on the creation of creative works and the learning of stylistic and
craft techniques. Ongoing work will be discussed with peer editors, which will not only help
students rethink their work but teach them to become better editors. Group critiques will provide the opportunity to give and receive helpful feedback. Each class will rely extensively on
the creative writing workshop model, and will focus on a specific genre of print-based creative
writing. The course can be repeated up to 3 times, for 9 semester credit hours, as long the topics are different. (Prerequisites: ENGL-386 or ENGL-389 or ENGL-390 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-511 
Advanced Topics in Creative Writing
This course is for students who have completed a college level writing course creative writing
workshop and want to explore in-depth a literary genre or add to their skills as a creative writer whether interested in poetry, fiction, non-fiction or a combination of genresa specific topic
within creative writing. The focus will be on the creation of a significant piece of writing for a
final project. In addition to planning and producing a single, sustained creative work, students
will complete other exercises and assignments in order to experiment with other genresa variety of writing techniques. Through reading and discussion they will see their own writing in a
larger context. Weekly Regular class critiques will provide the opportunity to give and receive
helpful feedback. (Prerequisites: Successful completion of one of the following courses - ENGL440, ENGL-441, ENGL-442, ENGL-462, ENGL-542, 0502-449, 0502-451, 0502-452, 0502-453,
0502-455, 0502-459 or 0502-560 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
ENGL-543 
Game-Based Fiction Workshop
This course is for students who have completed a creative writing workshop and want to explore
how games and rules can be used to produce unique and unpredictable narratives. Projects
will include individual writing exercises, collaborative writing practice, and critiques of peer
writing. Students will examine how different game mechanics produce different kinds of narratives and may be encouraged to develop their own game-based writing projects. Through the
reading and discussion of other narrative media, students will learn the affordances and limitations of game-based storytelling systems. (Prerequisites: Completion of First Year Writing
(FYW) requirement is required prior to enrolling in this class.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-582 
Advanced Topics in Computational Linguistics
Study of a focus topic of increased complexity in computational linguistics. The focus topic
varies each semester. Students will develop skills in computational linguistics analysis in a laboratory setting, according to professional standards. A research project plays a central role in
the course. Students will engage with relevant research literature, research design and methodology, project development, and reporting in various formats. (Prerequisites: ENGL-481 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENGL-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a regular classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an independent study are provided in College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Fine Arts
FNRT-130 
Introduction to Theatre
An introduction to theatre as a performing art. Students develop skills in reading, analysis and
evaluation through an examination of theatre’s forms, constituent elements, and its cultural,
stylistic and historical development. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FNRT-201 
Music in the US
This course is a survey of music in the United States from the time of European colonization
to the present. Particular emphasis is placed upon the question of what makes music distinctively American. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-202 
Studies in World Music
A course designed to explore selected music cultures from North America, South America,
Africa, India, Asia, East Asia, and Central and Southeastern Europe. The primary goal of the
course will be to expand understanding of and perceptions about music both outside and
within Western cultural traditions. In addition to class discussions, students will have opportunities for hands-on activities associated with the cultures studied. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

110	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

FNRT-203 
American Popular and Rock Music
This course examines the history and elements of Popular & Rock music in the United States
from the end of the 19th century to current times. Emphasis will be placed on the music that was
written and performed after WWII. Students will be introduced to various styles of this genre as
well as an introduction to those musical elements necessary to define a rudimentary analysis of
the music. Among the composers and performers to be studied are early Minstrel performers,
Louis Armstrong, Scott Joplin, George Gershwin, Blues musicians, Benny Goodman, Frank
Sinatra, R and B musicians, country and western, Elvis Presley, Motown, Ray Charles, folk, Jimi
Hendrix, disco, punk, metal, grunge and pop. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-204 
Music and the Stage
A historical and cultural survey of collaboration between the arts of music and theatre, focusing
on a selection of significant creative products that combine music and drama. Possible works
studied include those by Shakespeare, Monteverdi, Mozart-Daponte, John Gay, BeethovenGoethe, Wagner, Puccini, Brecht-Weill, and Bernstein, spanning the genres of Renaissance
tragedy and comedy, opera seria, opera buffa, ballad opera, incidental music, romantic drama,
Italian opera, music-drama, epic theatre, cabaret, vaudeville, and musical comedy. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-205 
Introduction to Music Theory
This course is designed for the student who has basic musical literacy (ability to read music
notation). In addition to the writing of melody, two-part counterpoint and four-part harmony, some attention will be given to the analysis of form and style. Because it is important that
theoretical understanding be coordinated with musical application, time will be devoted to
the development of musicianship. Consideration will be given to individual skills and abilities, hopefully allowing for the maximum development of each student. (Elementary music
reading ability) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-206 
Queer Looks
In this course we examine representations of queer sexuality in art, film and popular culture
beginning in the repressive 1950s, followed by the Stonewall Riots of 1969. We situate the birth
of gay liberation in the U.S. in the context of the civil rights struggles, feminism and the antiwar movement. We turn to the work of Andy Warhol that looms over the post-war period,
challenged subsequently by the onset of AIDS and the work of General Idea and Act-Up, on the
one hand, and the more graphically provocative work of Robert Mapplethorpe, on the other.
We examine the diversification of the queer community as transgendered identity asserts itself
and the opening of popular culture to issues of diverse sexual identities. We explore expressions of queer sensibility outside of North America and Europe. We turn finally to the issue of
gay marriage, both in the U.S. and abroad. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-207 
Dramatic Theory and Text Analysis
The course is designed to provide students with a foundation in major Dramatic and
Performance Theories including works by Aristotle, Stanislavsky, Brecht, Grotowski, and a
variety of other contemporary theorists and practitioners. In addition to surveying the work
of key Dramatic and Performance theorists and theories, the course will engage students in the
application of these theories in the study and analysis of play texts from a variety of periods,
genres and cultures. Students will analyze these texts from the perspective of both the logistic and aesthetic requirements of production (as actors, directors and designers). Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-211 
Era of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven
Many of the characteristics of art music up to the present day have their beginnings in the late
eighteenth century. This course explores the creation and performance of music within the
context of European cultural, political and artistic ideals from 1740 to 1825, with particular
attention given to the works of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-223 
Historic Photographic Processes
This is a studio-based class in which student recreate a number of different nineteenth century photographic processes. Students will explore the history of photographic technology
through use of primary sources and hands on projects. The chemistry and deterioration of the
materials will be reviewed through the use of primary texts, projects and discussion. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-224 
History and Theory of Exhibitions
Art exhibitions are organized around a curatorial premise, a statement that articulates an idea
allowing for the selection of work included in an exhibition. This course begins with an overview of exhibition history, starting with the transformation of the Louvre into the first public
art museum following the French Revolution, where art history, a discipline developed in the
19th century, was enlisted to organize exhibition. The course then examines the proliferation
of types of exhibitions that accompanies modernism, up to the present, paying close attention
to the curatorial premise animating the exhibitions. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

FNRT-230 
Theatre Ensemble
The Theatre Ensemble is an experiential-learning course in which students will have various opportunities to apply theoretic knowledge to practice through participation in a faculty
mentored or faculty directed theatre production on campus. Course content will include CLA
main stage productions, as well as other ensemble productions that perform or develop theatre performances covering a range of genres, periods and cultures. Students will be expected
to write, create and/or analyze texts as well as participate as actors, designers and technicians.
Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-231 
Theory and History of Acting
This course will introduce students to the history and theory of acting in Western Culture
from the late 19th Century up to the present day. Particular focus will be paid to the theories
of Stanislavsky and Stanislavsky-based approaches along with complementary and contrasting methods developed by such theorist/practitioners as Jerzy Grotowski, Lee Strasberg and
Sanford Meisner. Students can expect a course that combines lecture/discussion with practical
exercises designed to apply concepts and theory using acting techniques designed to strengthen
vocal and physical expression and to stimulate the imagination. In addition, actors will be introduced to scene work and develop skills for text analysis as a basis for character development.
Assessment will include quizzes, papers, and in-class participation in exercises and scene work.
As an introductory course, the course objectives are to provide students with a broad survey of
the aesthetics, theory and practice of acting. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-250 
RIT Singers
The RIT Singers is an experiential-learning course in which students learn music theory and
historical context by learning pieces from the 16th century to the present and performing
them at three major concerts a year. Participation in learning and performing such music
gives students an experiential appreciation and understanding of the role of music in modern
society. In addition, students from the RIT Singers have opportunities to sing in a variety of
small vocal ensembles. Auditions will be held to assess proper placement. Contact instructor
for more information. Lecture 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-251 
RIT Orchestra
The RIT Orchestra performs three major concerts a year of standard orchestral repertoire from
the 16th century to the present. In addition, students from the RIT Orchestra have the opportunity to play in a variety of chamber music ensembles. Auditions will be held to assess proper
placement. Contact instructor for more information. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Lecture, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-252 
RITConcert Band
The RIT Concert Band is an experiential-learning course in which students learn music theory
and historical context by learning several works from the Concert Band literature including
standard wind band literature, contemporary compositions, marches, and orchestral transcriptions. The ensemble prepares to perform three major concerts a year and participates in
departmental performances. Participation in learning and performing such music gives students an experiential appreciation and understanding of the role of music in modern society.
Auditions will be held to assess proper placement. Contact instructor for more information.
Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-253 
World Music Ensemble
The World Music Ensemble is a “hands-on” course, in which students learn the fundamentals
of music as a sociological phenomenon and a variety of concepts and world views to answer
the question, “What is music?” This is accomplished by introducing students to several music
cultures, through learning fundamental instrumental and dance techniques, with African music
being central to the study. Ensemble is coached four to six times a year by professional musicians and dancers, including Ghanaian Master Drummer Martin Kwaku Obeng, and performs
several times each school year, both on campus and in the community. Enrollment is open to
all interested students, faculty, and staff, regardless of musical proficiency. Developing cooperation and teamwork is a necessary outcome of participation in this ensemble. Auditions
will be held to assess proper placement. Contact instructor for more information. Lecture 3,
Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-254 
RIT Jazz Ensemble
Preparing for and performing concerts of jazz repertoire offers students the opportunity to
broaden their knowledge of and appreciation for music, and its role in society, through the
careful analysis of musical forms and ideas, and the comparison of exemplary works from a
variety of times, places and social/cultural necessities. The RIT Jazz Ensemble performs three
major concerts a year of standard repertoire from the early 20th century to the present. Students
from the RIT Jazz Ensemble also have the opportunity to play in a variety of informal performances both on and off campus. Auditions will be held to assess proper placement. Contact
instructor for more information. Lecture 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)

	

FNRT-255 
RIT Chamber Orchestra
Preparing for and performing concerts of orchestral repertoire offers students the opportunity
to broaden their knowledge of and appreciation for music, and its role in society, through the
careful analysis of musical forms and ideas, and the comparison of exemplary works from a
variety of times, places and social/cultural necessities. The RIT Chamber Orchestra is a select
group of advanced players It performs concerts and engages in other activities, in particular
the exploration of performing practices and stylistic considerations apropos to 17th, 18th
and 20th-century music. In particular, the RIT Chamber Orchestra revives works from the
18th and early 19th centuries that have not been performed in modern times. Participation is
by invitation of the music director, or by audition. Contact instructor for more information.
Lecture, Credits 1 (Spring)
FNRT-256 
Applied Music
Students will receive private (one-to-one) instrumental or voice lessons and participate in
studio performance opportunities. Private lessons are offered to support the RIT ensembles
program, therefore only students who are active participants in an approved RIT ensemble
will be eligible for lessons. Studio 1, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FNRT-260 
Design/Stagecraft Apprenticeship
This course is designed to provide motivated students interested in technical theatre the opportunity to observe and participate in the theatre design process from conception to execution,
while learning basic stagecraft skills involved in professional theatre production via an internship at a local theatre. Students will work directly with professional directors, designers and
stage technicians on the production of a play from design concept to performance. The experience will allow active engagement in collaborative processes and methods commonly employed
to create theatre productions. Depending upon the interests and abilities of the student, and the
needs of the specific production, students may be assigned to a specific area of design stagecraft
(i.e. Costumes or Scenic), or learn and engage in a more general capacity. The learning objectives of this apprenticeship are to give students an understanding of the goals and methods of
design and stagecraft as critical elements in translating a play text into a fully realized artistically unified theatre expression. Students will have bi-weekly meetings with the instructor.
Lecture 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-301 
Theatre in Europe
A survey of theatre and drama of selected European nations and periods, emphasizing plays and
theatre productions in particular historical, artistic, and theoretical contexts (e.g. “Modernist
European Theatre and Drama, 1890-1930” — “Romanticism and Realism on Continental
Stages” — “France and Germany, 1789-1989” — “Theatre of the European Renaissance” —
“Major Dramatists of Scandinavia, Russia, and Central Europe”). Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-302 
Theatre in the United States
A historical survey of American theatre and drama, from the Colonial period to the early 21st
century, focusing on a selection of significant plays and stylistic movements in the twentieth
century. Plays studied include those by Eugene O’Neill, Arthur Miller, Tennessee Williams,
Edward Albee, Sam Shepard, and Tony Kushner, along with alternating selections by less wellknown and/or marginalized American dramatists, 1925 to 2000. The varied types of drama,
styles and modes of theatre production, and contributions of actors, directors, scenographers,
theorists, and critics provide a continuous context for this study of America’s developing theatre arts. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-303 
Shakespeare the Dramatist
A course in Shakespeare’s drama that emphasizes the plays as potential theatre productions. Studying a selection of plays representative of the different acknowledged types of
Shakespearean drama (comedy, tragedy, history, problem comedy, romance), students gain
a broad understanding of the character and range of Shakespeare’s poetic-dramatic art.
Experimenting with production activities such as oral interpretation, character presentation,
and scene rendering, they acquire a practical appreciation of Shakespearean drama’s theatrical potency, of the original staging conventions, and of how each type of play makes particular
generic demands on both performer and spectator. Augmenting the reading and expressive
activities is a term research project focused on collaborative realization of a staging interpretation of selected scenes from the Shakespeare plays on the syllabus. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-304 
African American Playwrights
A historical survey of African American playwrights and the significant moments, topics,
and themes that informed their work from the late 1800’s to the early 21st century. Plays by
American African Diaspora playwrights will be studied and will include works by Ira Aldridge,
Langston Hughes, Lorraine Hansberry, Amiri Baraka, Lynn Nottage, August Wilson, George
C. Wolfe, Ed Bullins, Anna Deavere Smith, and Ntozake Shange. The varied types of drama,
styles and modes of theatre production, and contributions of actors, directors, scenographers,
theorists, musicians, and critics provide a continuous context for this study of America’s developing theatre arts. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

111

College of Liberal Arts

FNRT-320 
Music of the Romantic Era
Survey of the rise of romanticism from Beethoven to Strauss in the context of the development
of 19th century musical styles in general. Topics of exploration include national trends in 19th
century music, the rise of the general public as arbiters of musical taste, philosophical influences, and performance considerations. (Prerequisites: FNRT-110 or FNRT-205 or FNRT-211
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-321 
Music Since 1900
Survey of the cultivated traditions of music in the 20th and 21st centuries, particularly in the
U. S., taking into account its political, social and historical frameworks. (Prerequisites: FNRT205 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-322 
Survey of Jazz
This course will survey the development of American jazz music, highlighting representative
composers and performers and significant works. Particular attention will be drawn to the
multi-racial influences on the creation of jazz music and its relationship to American culture
as a whole. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-323 
Survey of African-American Music
This course is a survey of African-American music through an examination of the major forms
of music-making and dance developed among African-Americans in the United States from the
early 17th century to the present. A brief introduction to West African cultural characteristics,
especially music and dance, as well as discussions of the African diaspora in the New World,
will serve as background for this survey. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-324 
Sounds of Protest
This course is designed to explore the variety of ways music has served as commentary on and/
or symbolic representation of social circumstances and events in America and throughout
the world, historically and in the present. Students will research, listen to, analyze, and discuss music representing a variety of genres, styles, and cultures, ranging from various forms
of European and American folk, popular, and concert music to selected non-western music.
Topics will include race, gender, sexuality, economics, class, war, and politics, among others.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-325 
American Popular Song
This course will survey the development of the American popular song and its composers and
performers, taking into account the political, social and historical perspectives reflected in this
commercial part of our vernacular music tradition. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-326 
History and Technology of Musical Instruments
The development of music in the Western art tradition had a mutually influential relationship with the changes in construction and manufacturing of musical instruments. Recent
research into the various and special sounds of instruments from different historical periods
has been pivotal in new approaches to performance over the past quarter century (“Historically
Informed Performance”). This course explores the historical development of musical instruments commonly used in performing Western art music, including various technologies
influencing manufacturing techniques and construction, performing techniques, historical
audience expectations of musical sound, and comparative performance practices. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-327 
The American Musical Theater
This course is designed as a survey of the development of the American musical theater, highlighting representative works, composers, librettists and performers of both the cultivated and
vernacular traditions. It is further designed as an appreciation course, fostering the development of a greater appreciation for all types of stage music and the ability to better evaluate the
quality of a work, the performance and the performers. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-354 
Exhibition Design
This course examines the history and practice of exhibition design. It reviews the history of
exhibitions within the development of museum-like institutions. In this course the following
aspects of exhibition design are considered: curatorial premise or theme, exhibition development timeline, exhibition site, contracts and contractual obligations, budgets and fundraising,
publicity material, didactic material, and exhibition design. The course includes field trips to
local institutions and collections throughout the semester. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-355 
Fundraising, Grant Writing, and Marketing for Nonprofit Institutions
This course examines the growing autonomy of collecting institutions as they are cut off from
various forms of governmental sponsorship and public subsidy and their subsequent needs
for raising money from outside, non-traditional sources. The course looks at issues of needs
assessment, budgeting, and strategic planning. It focuses on the design and implementation
of effective fundraising campaigns, as well as on the organization and writing of successful
grant proposals. It also considers the importance of marketing to overall institutional success.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

112	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

FNRT-356 
Interactive Design for Museums
This is a project based course which explores the intersection of interactive design and museum education. Interactive museum programs have the potential to engage museum visitors
by encouraging creative exploration, independent interpretation, and deeper understanding.
Students will learn how to make the study of material culture more interesting and approachable by creating interactive projects for both the museum and the internet. Students will learn
to incorporate educational outcomes into engaging learning experiences for museums. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-357 
Collections Management and Museum Administration
This course presents an overview of the administration and management of museums and their
collections. The course examines the governance structure of museums, focusing on personnel responsible for their administration, curation and education, and operations, as well as on
the mission statement and policies they determine. The course also details the management
of collections, including the development of a collections policy, management of that policy,
documentation and record keeping, acquisitions, and the creation/management of exhibitions.
Finally, the course considers collections care or preventive conservation, looking at both the
facility and collections. Throughout the semester, legal and ethical issues pertaining to museums and their collections will be emphasized. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-358 
Legal and Ethical Issues for Collecting Institutions
This course presents an overview of the legal and ethical issues that govern the institutions
and personnel involved in collecting cultural resources. Collecting institutions are governed
by national, state, and local laws that define how facilities and collections are used and this
course will consider them, as well as the larger social and historical context out of which they
developed. The course will consider the evolution of the museum as a public institution and
how the legal system increasingly defined minimum standards for maintaining collections,
the facilities in which they are housed, and guaranteeing public access; in addition legal standards for the collection will be studied, including definitions of ownership, what this means in
terms of intellectual property rights, copyright, reproduction (traditional and electronic), and
deaccessioning/disposal. These will be studied within the context of the society within which
the institution functions. The course will also study the development of national and international ethical standards and will examine the codes of behavior that govern the personal
and professional conduct of museum professionals and the practices that comprise conflicts
of interest. Ethical standards for collecting institutions will also be considered, particularly
those that address the responsibilities to a collection, the ethics of acquisition, the question of
illicit or stolen material, the issues of human remains and objects of sacred significance, and
repatriation. Attention will be paid to the changes in society that made these issues critical for
collecting institutions. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-370 
American Painting
A survey of the style and meaning in American paintings from the colonial limners, through
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, to contemporary artists. It centers on what distinguishes painting of the colonies and of the United States from the European counterpart.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-372 
American Film of the Studio Era
This course examines the history and aesthetics of the motion picture in the United States
between the 1890s and the early 1960s; emphasis will be placed on the analysis of both the work
of major American filmmakers and the development of major American film genres during the
Classical Hollywood Studio period. Among the filmmakers to be studied are Griffith, Chaplin,
Hawks, Ford, Capra, Welles, Curtiz, Wilder, Donen, Sirk, Ray, Hitchcock, and Kubrick. Genres
to be covered include the melodrama, silent comedy, screwball comedy, western, thriller, film
noir, newspaper film, and the gangster film. The films will be studied within the context of
contemporary cultural and political events, and will be discussed from several viewpoints,
including aesthetic, technical, social, and economic. The ways in which gender and class are
constructed through the movies will also be a major focus of study. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-373 
American Film Since the Sixties
This course examines the history and aesthetics of the motion picture in the United States since
the late 1960s, when the classical studio era ended. Emphasis will be placed on the analysis
of both the work of major American filmmakers and the evolution of major American film
genres between 1967 and 2001. Among the filmmakers to be studied are Kazan, Cassavetes,
Penn, Coppola, Scorsese, Spielberg, Allen, Seidelman, Lee, Burton, Altman, Tarantino, Coen,
and Lynch. The course will consider the evolution of such traditional Hollywood genres as the
gangster film, the romantic comedy, and the Hollywood movie, study the development of new,
blended genres, investigate the rise of the blockbuster, explore the rise of the Independents,
and follow the aesthetic changes that occurred since the 1967. The films will be studied within
the context of contemporary cultural and political events, and will be discussed from several
viewpoints, including aesthetic, technical, social, and economic. The ways in which gender,
race, and class are constructed through the movies will also be a major focus of study. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

FNRT-375 Women/Gender/Art
This course examines the role of women in the visual arts as both images makers and subject
matter in order to see how gender plays a role in the conceptualization of creativity and art.
Among the topics to be discussed are: the construction of femininity and gender in the patriarchy; art as an ideological practice; women, art, and society; art history, art education, and art
evaluation; women artists and their contemporaries. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-376 
Visual Culture Theory
Visual culture studies recognize the predominance of visual forms of media, communication,
and information in the contemporary world, investigating both high" cultural forms such as
fine art, design, and architecture and popular "low" cultural forms associated with mass media
and communications. Visual culture studies represents a turn in the discourse of the visual,
which had focused on content-based, critical readings of images, and has since broadened
its approach to additionally question the ways in which our consumption and production of
images and image based technologies are structured. Analyzing images from a social-historical perspective, visual culture asks: what are the effects of images? Can the visual be properly
investigated with traditional methodologies, which have been based on language, not imagery?
How do images visualize social difference? How are images viewed by varied audiences? How
are images embedded in a wider culture and how do they circulate? Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-378 
Memory, Memorials, Monuments
In this course we examine the public remembering and memorialization of historic events that
leads to memorials and monuments in the fields of architecture, sculpture and film. We begin
by examining the nature of memory, and specifically of collective memory, and its relationship
to historical events and its subsequent transformation in the process of memorialization. We
then look at examples of the sculptural monument, a traditional form of memorial, and the
evolution of its vocabulary in the second half of the 20th century. We also examine the memorial work undertaken by those museums whose primary function is to engage in remembering
historical events, a recent phenomenon in the field of museum building. We screen films and
examine how documentaries and dramatizations engage the spectator by remembering history
differently, The course culminates by examining the debates surrounding the remembering of
9/11 and of more recent traumatic events. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-379 
Art of India and Southeast Asia
A survey outlining the development of art in India and Southeast Asia, examining the philosophical circumstances and religious traditions (to include Buddhist, Hindu, Jain, and Islamic)
that distinguish eastern artistic traditions. There is opportunity for each student to pursue special interest in depth. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-380 
Art of China, Korea and Japan
A survey outlining the development of art in China, Korea and Japan, examining the philosophical circumstances and religious traditions (to include Daoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism)
that distinguish eastern artistic traditions. There is opportunity for each student to pursue
special interest in depth. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-381 
Art of Islam: the Arabic Tradition
A survey of artistic traditions (to include architecture, decorative arts [metalware, ceramics,
glass, wood], art of the book and painting) from the seventh century until the Mongol conquests in the thirteenth century in countries from Asia, Africa and Europe that were influenced
by the religion of Islam. There will be opportunity for each student to pursue special interests
in depth. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
FNRT-382 
Art of Islam: Persian/Turkish/Mughal Traditions
A survey of artistic traditions (to include architecture, decorative arts [metals, ceramics, glass,
wood], art of the book and painting) from the Mongol conquests in the thirteenth century until
the European imperialistic presence in the later eighteenth century in countries from Asia,
Africa and Europe that were influenced by the religion of Islam. There will be opportunity for
each student to pursue special interests in depth. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-384 
Art of Dying
This course explores the experience of dying a profoundly human and universal experience
as it is represented by artists who are themselves facing immanent death. The unique and
deeply personal process of each dying artist is crucially informed by social, cultural and historical as well as artistic contexts. The course will focus primarily on visual artists and writers
living with and dying of disease - such as AIDS, cancer and cystic fibrosis as well as mortality
and age. Topics such as aesthetics, artistic media, representation, grief, bereavement, illness,
care-giving, aging, and the dying process will be considered within the context of issues of
race, class, ethnicity, sexuality, gender and community values. Some of the artists covered
will be Jo Spence, Hannah Wilke, Elias Canetti, Bob Flanagan, Herve Guibert, Tom Joslin,
Laurie Lynd, Audre Lorde, Charlotte Salomon, Keith Haring, Frida Kahlo, Bas Jan Ader, Ted
Rosenthal, Felix Gonzalez Torres, Keith Haring, Eric Steel, Derek Jarman, Eric Michaels, and
David Wojnarowicz. We will also explore some of the critical theory of Roland Barthes, Michel
Foucault, Elaine Scarry, Susan Sontag, and Ross Chambers. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

FNRT-410 Playmaking
This is an upper-level course in the practical and critical understanding of how plays are made
— dramaturgy — beginning with the conception of a dramatic story, and proceeding through
the creative phases of plotting, script writing, acting study, directing, staging, producing, and
critical evaluation. All students engage in all the stages of playmaking work. At a designated
point in the course, specific responsibilities for realizing the finished product — a performed
play — are assigned. The finished product will vary: it might be an original student script
(or several); it might be a collection of scenes from one or more existing dramas; or it might
be a published full-length play. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-440 
Deaf Art and Cinema
Students will examine the context in which specific cultural groups have chosen to create works
about their experiences. They will go on to explore a wide range of artistic works representing
the Deaf experience in visual arts and cinema. Students will be expected to analyze works in
terms of cultural symbols and themes. Attention will be given to historical context (personal
and collective) that has helped to shape many of these works, motifs, and messages. Students
will write and present in-depth papers examining specific works and artists / filmmakers. In
addition, students will be expected to create an original artwork and a collaborative short film.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-485 
Advanced Music Theory
This course is designed for the student who has a knowledge of basic music theory and an
understanding of four-part diatonic composition. In addition to the continuing study of melodic construction and development, thematic development in two-part counterpoint, four-part
harmony, chromatic materials and modulation, and analysis of form and style, emphases will
be placed on the development of individual music skills. (Prerequisites: FNRT-205 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
FNRT-489 
Special Topics
Allows examination of a special problem or topic area in the theatre, dance, music, visual arts
and other performing and fine arts. Topics and specific content and methods vary from term
to term. Each term’s offering, however, features an introduction to a historical period, movement, phenomenon, practitioner(s) or other subfield of study within performing arts and/or
visual culture. In so doing, students develop theoretical and experiential knowledge of an artistic
period, movement, phenomenon, practitioner(s) or other subfield of study within performing
arts and/or visual culture. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-490 
Special Topics in Performing Arts
An in-depth examination of a selected aspect of Performing Arts with a focus on performance
and composition. Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
FNRT-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an
independent study are provided in College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent Study,
Credits 1 - 12 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Foreign Languages
MLAR-201 
Beginning Arabic I
Beginning Arabic I introduces students with no prior knowledge of the lan-guage to Modern
Standard Arabic. Beginning Arabic I builds the foundation skills in speaking, listening, reading, writing, and culture, with emphasis on beginning writing and on conversation. Students
must take placement exam if this is their first RIT class in Arabic and they have some prior
study of Arabic. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
MLAR-202 
Beginning Arabic II
Beginning Arabic II focuses on the development of functional competence in speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLAR-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
MLAR-301 
Intermediate Arabic I
Intermediate Arabic I continues with intermediate-level development of functional skills in
speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture, including conversation, with increased work
in reading and writing. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam
or MLAR-202 or MLAR-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLAR-302 
Intermediate Arabic II
Intermediate Arabic II, the end of the intermediate year sequence, does ad-vanced-intermediate work in all skills, including conversation, with increased work in reading and writing.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAR-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

113

College of Liberal Arts

MLAR-401 
Advanced Arabic I
Advanced Arabic I, the beginning of the advanced (third year) sequence, does advanced work in
all skills (speaking, listening, reading, writing, culture), including conversation, with increased
work in reading, writing, and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLAR-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLAR-402 
Advanced Arabic II
Advanced Arabic II, the final course of the advanced (third year) sequence, continues study
of the advanced-year textbook and does advanced work in all skills (speaking, listening, reading, writing, culture), including conversation, with increased work in reading, writing and
culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAR-401
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLAR-449 
Special Topics in Arabic
An in-depth exploration of the Arabic language and culture focusing on skills/topics that are
not covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLAS-201 
Beginning American Sign Language I
ASL I includes linguistic features, cultural protocols and core vocabulary for students to function in basic ASL conversations that include ASL grammar for asking and answering questions
while introducing oneself, exchanging personal information, talking about family, friends
and surroundings, and discussing activities. This course is designed for students who have
no knowledge of American Sign Language. Students must take placement exam if this is their
first RIT class in Sign Language and they have some prior study of Sign Language. Lecture,
Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLAS-202 
Beginning American Sign Language II
This course expands the basic principles presented in ASL I. ASL II teaches students to use
linguistics features, cultural protocols and core vocabulary to function in basic ASL conversations that include ASL grammar for giving directions, describing, making request, talking
about family, occupations and routines, and attributing qualities to others. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 1 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAS-201 or equivalent course..)
Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLAS-301 
Intermediate American Sign Language I
This course builds upon information taught in Beginning ASL I and II and introduces expanded
grammatical features of ASL and specialized vocabulary, while continuing to increase fingerspelling and numbers receptive and expressive skills. In addition, some basic features of
ASL discourse are taught in organizing and explaining contextual information. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAS-202 or MLAS-202T or INTP125 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLAS-302 
Intermediate American Sign Language II
This course builds upon information taught in Beginning ASL I-Intermediate ASL I. Students
continue learning and using ASL vocabulary, grammatical principles and various intermediate-level discourse features in narratives and presentations in ASL. Students analyze multiple
meaning English words and English idioms to express concepts in ASL. Issues related to Deaf
culture continue to be introduced based on unit topics. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3
on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAS-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
MLAS-351 
Linguistics of American Sign Language
Students in this course will be introduced to the study of American Sign Language in terms of
its linguistic structure and use. In particular, students will learn to analyze the basic features of
ASL phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics and pragmatics/discourse In addition, research
related to variation in ASL and acquisition of ASL will also be reviewed. Instruction is in ASL
(an interpreter will not be provided). (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or successful completion of one of the following courses: MLAS-202, MLAS202T, MLAS-301, MLAS-302 or INTP-125.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLAS-352 
American Sign Language Literature
In this course, students will explore a wide range of literary works representing the various
genres of ASL literature. Students will be expected to analyze works in terms of literary conventions/techniques as well as relevant cultural symbols and themes. Attention will be given
to historical context, Deaf cultural values, and the style/conventions used by individual literary artists. Each student will be required to complete literary analysis papers. In addition,
students will be expected to create original ASL literary works and/or retell well-known ASL
literary works as individuals or in collaboration with other students. This course is conducted
in ASL, without an interpreter, and will require considerable reading and viewing of videotaped
materials. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or successful
completion of one of the following courses: MLAS-202, MLAS-202T, MLAS-301, MLAS-302
or INTP-125.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

114	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MLAS-401 
Advanced American Sign Language I
This course builds upon information taught in Beginning ASL I — Intermediate ASL II.
Students continue learning and using ASL vocabu-lary, grammatical principles and various
advanced-level discourse features in narratives and presentations in ASL. Students continue
to analyze multiple meaning English words and English idioms to express concepts in ASL.
Issues related to Deaf culture continue to be introduced based on unit topics. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAS-302 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLAS-402 
Advanced American Sign Language II
This course builds upon information taught in Beginning ASL I - Advanced ASL I. Students
continue learning and using ASL vocabulary, grammatical principles and various advancedlevel discourse features in narratives and presentations in ASL. Students analyze different
components in storytelling. ASL Literature will be introduced in this level. Students identify
controversial issues in various works of ASL Literature. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4
on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLAS-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
MLAS-449 
Special Topics in Deaf Cultural Studies
An in-depth exploration of the Deaf Cultural Studies language and culture by focusing the skills/
topics that are not regularly covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLCH-201 
Beginning Chinese I
This course is designed for beginners, with no prior study of Chinese. It introduces students
to the sounds, basic sentence structures, and the writing system of Mandarin Chinese. Pinyin,
the Romanization (phonetic transliteration) of Mandarin Chinese, is taught and required
throughout the course. Students also learn to read and write Chinese characters. Emphasis is
on developing listening and speaking skills, as well as building a vocabulary based on the ideographic Chinese characters. Chinese culture is also introduced through the course. Students
must take a placement exam if this is their first RIT class in Chinese and they have some prior
knowledge of Mandarin Chinese. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
MLCH-202 
Beginning Chinese II
This course continues the the beginning level of Chinese study. The focus is on developing listening and speaking skills, with an increasing emphasis on reading and writing skills. Students
will learn more expressions, sentence structures as well as other parts of the Chinese grammar. Further aspects of Chinese culture are also introduced, in parallel to Chinese language
study. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLCH-201
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
MLCH-301 
Intermediate Chinese I
This course begins the intermediate level of Chinese study. Knowledge of Pinyin, Chinese
characters, and sentence structures covered by the beginning level of Chinese study is required
before taking this course. The focus continues to be on developing listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Further aspects of Chinese culture are also introduced, in parallel to
Chinese language study. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam
or MLCH-202 or MLCH-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLCH-302 
Intermediate Chinese II
This course continues the intermediate level of Chinese study. Knowledge of Pinyin, Chinese
characters, and sentence structures covered by the first three semesters of Chinese learning is
required before taking this course. The focus continues to be on developing listening, speaking,
reading, and writing skills. Further aspects of Chinese culture are also introduced, in parallel
to Chinese language study. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language Placement
Exam or MLCH-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLCH-401 
Advanced Chinese I
This course begins the advanced level of Chinese study. It is designed to further develop competence in the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Following
Intermediate Chinese II, this course continues the grammar acquisition, expansion of vocabulary with more lengthy reading and writing. Classroom discussion and writing practice are
important parts of the course. By the end of the course work, students should be able to express
views on serious, topical issues in increased detail. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT
Language Placement Exam or MLCH-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLCH-402 
Advanced Chinese II
This course continues the advanced level of Chinese study. The main purpose of this course is to
further develop competence in language skills as well as cultural literacy by using the textbook
as well as a diversity of authentic multimedia materials that pertain to Chinese matters and
values. By identifying, analyzing, comparing, and discussing both traditional and contemporary Chinese socio-cultural issues, students will acquire a better understanding of the language,
culture, and Chinese society. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement
Exam or MLCH-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

MLCH-449 
Special Topics in Chinese
An in-depth exploration of the Chinese language and culture focusing on skills/topics that are
not covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLCU-301 Psycholinguistics
This course introduces main subfields of psycholinguistics, a study that deals with all aspects
of human language performance: language acquisition, sentence processing/comprehension,
and sentence production/speaking. Through readings on theoretical and experimental studies,
findings and issues in first language acquisition, sentence processing, and sentence production are introduced. By discussing how speakers of different languages acquire, comprehend,
and produce sentences, the course also examines interactions with language-specific, linguistic
constraints and human language performances. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLFR-201 
Beginning French I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence. The sequence provides students without prior
exposure to the language with a sound basis for learning French as it is used today in its spoken
and written forms. The goal of the sequence is proficiency in communication skills with an
emphasis on oral proficiency. The sequence also acquaints students with contemporary culture and life in French-speaking countries. Students must take placement exam if this is their
first RIT class in French and they have some prior study of French. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
MLFR-202 
Beginning French II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence. The sequence provides students without
prior exposure to the language with a sound basis for learning French as it is used today in
its spoken and written forms. The goal of the sequence is proficiency in communication skills
with an emphasis on oral proficiency. The sequence also acquaints students with contemporary culture and life in French-speaking countries. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT
Language Placement Exam or MLFR-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
MLFR-301 
Intermediate French I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the intermediate level. The sequence provides
students with the tools necessary to increase their ability to function in French. Communicative
activities, contemporary texts, vocabulary study, and grammar are used to expand all communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues
of contemporary French life and culture as well as the cultures of the Francophone world.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLFR-202 or MLFR202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLFR-302 
Intermediate French II
This is the second course of a two-course sequence at the intermediate level. The sequence
provides students with the tools necessary to increase their ability to function in French.
Communicative activities, contemporary texts, vocabulary study, and grammar are used to
expand all communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address
issues of contemporary French life and culture as well as the cultures of the Francophone world.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLFR-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLFR-351 
French Films and Hollywood
A comparative study of French films and their American remakes from the 1930s to the 21st
century to determine what these films reveal about the cultural and cinematic contexts from
which they emerge. The course examines differences as well as similarities in the construction of
identities in France and the United States. Devotes particular attention to the (re)construction
of race, space, gender, and national histories. Conducted in English. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLFR-352 
The French Heritage in Films
Heritage films are central to the French cinematographic production. They enable the transmission and the reevaluation of a tradition that lies at the core of French cultural identity. This
course examines a selection of French films adapted from both canonical and non-canonical
texts representative of major events, trends, social issues, and artistic movements that contributed to shaping modern France. Students will become familiar with world-renowned French
novels, short stories, comic books, and films. The course deals with topics such as aristocratic
culture, racial identity in France, the myth of the resistance and the legacy of the Second World
War, France’s rural past, the French colonial experience, women and bourgeois culture, the
long-standing tradition of comic books and comedy in France, the Tradition of Quality, the
French New Wave, and heritage films. The course also examines the interconnectedness of
French culture and the cultures of the United States, England, and former French colonies.
It notably explores how the French colonial experience informed the development of French
cinema, and how French heritage films were both inspired and reinterpreted by British and
American cinematographic industries to reflect the cultures and values of those societies.
Conducted in English. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

MLFR-401 
Advanced French I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the advanced level. This course will emphasize active spoken language use. Other skills will also be used, such as reading, writing and
listening, but primarily as helps for developing conversational ability. Attention will also be
given to grammatical accuracy. Readings will cover historical and current events in France and
in other Francophone cultures. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement
Exam or MLFR-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLFR-402 
Advanced French II
This is the second course of a two-course sequence at the advanced level. This course will
emphasize active spoken language use. Other skills will also be used, such as reading, writing
and listening, but primarily as helps for developing conversational ability. Attention will also be
given to grammatical accuracy. Readings will cover historical and current events in France and
in other Francophone cultures. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement
Exam or MLFR-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLFR-449 
Special Topics in French
An in-depth exploration of the French language and culture focusing on skills/topics that are
not covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLGR-201 
Beginning German I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence. The sequence provides students without prior
exposure to the language with a sound basis for learning German as it is used today in its spoken and written forms. The goal of the sequence is proficiency in communication skills with an
emphasis on oral proficiency. The sequence also acquaints students with contemporary culture
and life in the German-speaking countries. Students must take a placement exam if this is their
first RIT class in German and they have some prior study of German. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
MLGR-202 
Beginning German II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence. The sequence provides students without
prior exposure to the language with a sound basis for learning German as it is used today in
its spoken and written forms. The goal of the sequence is proficiency in communication skills
with an emphasis on oral proficiency. The sequence also acquaints students with contemporary
culture and life in the German-speaking countries. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT
Language Placement Exam or MLGR-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
MLGR-301 
Intermediate German I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the intermediate level. The sequence provides students with the tools to increase their ability to function in German. Communicative
activities, contemporary texts, and the study of vocabulary and grammar are used to expand all
communication skills, espe-cially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues of
contemporary German life and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLGR-202 or MLGR-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLGR-302 
Intermediate German II
This is the second course of a two-course sequence at the intermediate level. The sequence provides students with the tools to increase their ability to function in German. Communicative
activities, contemporary texts, the study of vocabulary and grammar are used to expand all
communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues of
contemporary German life and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLGR-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLGR-401 
Advanced German I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the advanced level. This sequence is designed
to develop in-depth proficiency in the four language skills of speaking, understanding, reading, and writing. This sequence develops the ability to understand and communicate freely
on a variety of familiar and unfamiliar topics by expanding the vocabulary base and by discussions, compositions, and oral reports based on cultural and literary texts and audio-visual
materials. The sequence includes a rigorous study of advanced grammatical structures and
usage. Students must take a placement exam if this is their first RIT class in German and they
have prior study of German. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement
Exam or MLGR-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLGR-402 
Advanced German II
This is the last course of a two-course sequence at the advanced level. This sequence is designed
to intensively develop proficiency in the four language skills of speaking, understanding, reading, and writing. This sequence develops the ability to understand and communicate freely
by expanding the vocabulary base and by discussions, compositions, and oral reports, based
on cultural and literary texts and audio-visual materials. The sequence includes a rigorous
study of advanced grammatical structures and usage Students must take a placement exam
if this is their first RIT class in German and they have prior study of German. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLGR-401 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

115

College of Liberal Arts

MLGR-449 
Special Topics in German
An in-depth exploration of the German language and culture focusing on skills/topics that are
not covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLIT-201 
Beginning Italian I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence. The sequence provides students without prior
exposure to the language with a sound basis for learning Italian as it is used today in its spoken
and written forms. The goal of the sequence is proficiency in communication skills with an
emphasis on oral proficiency. The sequence also acquaints students with contemporary culture
and life in the Italian-speaking countries. Students must take placement exam if this is their
first RIT class in Italian and they have some prior study of Italian. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
MLIT-202 
Beginning Italian II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence. The sequence provides students without
prior exposure to the language with a sound basis for learning Italian as it is used today in its
spoken and written forms. The goal of the sequence is proficiency in communication skills with
an emphasis on oral proficiency. The sequence also acquaints students with contemporary
culture and life in the Italian-speaking countries. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT
Language Placement Exam or MLIT-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)
MLIT-301 
Intermediate Italian I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the intermediate level. The sequence provides students with the tools to increase their ability to function in Italian. Communicative
activities, contemporary texts, and the study of vocabulary and grammar are used to expand
all communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues
of contemporary Italian life and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLIT-202 or MLIT-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLIT-302 
Intermediate Italian II
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the intermediate level. The sequence provides students with the tools to increase their ability to function in Italian. Communicative
activities, contemporary texts, and the study of vocabulary and grammar are used to expand
all communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues
of contemporary Italian life and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLIT-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLIT-401 
Advanced Italian I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the advanced level. The sequence provides
students with the tools to increase their ability to function in Italian. Communicative activities, contemporary texts, and the study of vocabulary and grammar are used to expand all
communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues
of contemporary Italian life and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLIT-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLIT-402 
Advanced Italian II
This is the first course of a two-course sequence at the advanced level. The sequence provides
students with the tools to increase their ability to function in Italian. Communicative activities, contemporary texts, and the study of vocabulary and grammar are used to expand all
communication skills, especially oral proficiency. This sequence continues to address issues
of contemporary Italian life and culture. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLIT-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLIT-449 
Special Topics in Italian
An in-depth exploration of the Italian language and culture focusing on skills/topics that are not
covered in sequential regular language courses. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLJP-201 
Beginning Japanese I
This is the first course in the first year sequence designed for students with no prior exposure to
Japanese. It provides a sound introduction to the language as it is spoken and written today. A
strong emphasis is placed on oral proficiency and the appropriate use of language in Japanese
society. Hiragana and Katakana syllabary is also taught for written communication. Not open
to students with prior Japanese instruction. Students must take placement exam if this is their
first RIT class in Japanese and they have some prior study of Japanese. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)
MLJP-202 
Beginning Japanese II
This is the second course in the first-year sequence. It provides a sound introduction to the
language as it is spoken and written today. A strong emphasis is placed on proficiency and
the appropriate use of language in the Japanese society. Students continue to learn how to
use language in real-life situations for different communication purposes. Approximately
120 Kanji characters are also introduced for written communication. Students must have a
good command of Hiragana and Katakana and basic knowledge of Kanji to take this course.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLJP-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Spring)

116	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MLJP-301 
Intermediate Japanese I
This is the first course in the second-year sequence designed to give students more advanced
instruction and practice in the skills of speaking, reading, writing, and comprehending contemporary Japanese. A strong emphasis is placed on proficiency through reading, writing, and
speaking activities. Students learn cultural information and practice using the language in real
life situations in Japanese society. Approximately 60 new Kanji are introduced. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLJP-202 or MLJP-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLJP-302 
Intermediate Japanese II
This is the second course in the second-year sequence designed to give students more advanced
instruction and practice in the skills of speaking, reading, writing, and comprehending contemporary Japanese. A strong emphasis is placed on proficiency through reading, writing, and
speaking activities. Students learn cultural information and practice using the language in real
life situations in Japanese society. Approximately 120 new Kanji are introduced. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLJP-301 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLJP-351 
Languages in Japanese Society
This course aims to introduce students to modern Japanese society, its rich cultural heritage,
and the use of Japanese language that reflects the societal norms. It provides students with a
fundamental yet diverse knowledge of Japanese culture and Japanese language use. Course
work will include lectures, readings, discussions, and working with multi-media resources.
Knowledge of Japanese helpful but not necessary. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLJP-401 
Advanced Japanese I
This course provides advanced students of Japanese with training in all four language skills.
Students will practice oral communication with a high degree of proficiency in various social
settings. They will improve communicative skills with discussions and debate. They will also
receive training in reading semi-authentic and authentic materials with the help of a dictionary, as well as training in writing for a specific purpose, such as news reports and critical essays.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLJP-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLJP-402 
Advanced Japanese II
This course provides advanced students of Japanese with training in all four language skills.
Students will practice oral communication with a high degree of proficiency in various social
settings. They will improve communicative skills with discussions and debate. They will also
receive training in reading semi-authentic and authentic materials with the help of a dictionary, as well as training in writing for a specific purpose, such as news reports and critical essays.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLJP-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLJP-403 
Professional Japanese
This course is designed to improve the four skills (i.e., speaking, listening, reading and writing)
developed in the elementary/intermediate sequence to master formal interactions in Japanese.
Students will learn the formal expressions through conversation as well as reading materials and
discussion of the selected readings. The course gives students an opportunity to deepen their
knowledge of the structure of Japanese society as well as to practice conversation in Japanese,
especially in professional and formal contexts. Students will be able to cultivate skill in expressing their thought through classroom discussion and writing assignments. Moreover, they will
learn a more advanced level of vocabulary, expressions, and kanji characters in preparation
for Level 2/3 of the Japanese Proficiency Test. This course will be useful for students who are
planning to seek employment in Japanese companies or in companies doing business in Japan,
and also for students who want to learn more about business in Japan. This is a language class.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLJP-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLJP-405 
Advanced Speaking in Japanese
This course is designed to establish speaking proficiency at an advanced level by expanding students’ understanding of the socio-cultural knowledge necessary for communication. Readings
concerning such topics as recent social developments and traditional culture in Japan will provide the basis for students’ discussions in class as well as writing assignments. Students will
also master both formal and informal interactions in Japanese in various contexts by practicing
dialogues and creating role-plays on situations associated with the topics and skills required
for advanced speakers. Moreover, each student will conduct research on a topic related to
Japan and give a presentation in Japanese in class. With these kinds of activities, students will
not only improve such practical communication skills as expressing their thoughts and giving
explanations, but also acquire vocabulary, expressions and kanji characters at a more advanced
level, and deepen their understanding of Japan. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT
Language Placement Exam or MLJP-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

MLJP-449 
Special Topics in Japanese
An in-depth exploration of the Japanese language and culture focusing on skills/topics that are
not covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

MLPO-449 
Special Topics in Portuguese
An in-depth exploration of the Portuguese language and culture focusing on skills/topics that
are not covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

MLJP-451 
Structure of the Japanese Language
This course aims to increase student understanding of basic characteristics of the Japanese
language. Topics include the genetic affiliation of the Japanese language, sound system, word
formation, syntactic structures, socio-cultural factors in language use, and historical development of the writing system. Students will become acquainted with the language from a
linguistics perspective and develop analytical skills by solving linguistic problems pertinent to
Japanese language. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or
MLJP-202 or MLJP-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

MLRU-201 
Beginning Russian I
Beginning Russian I introduces the Russian language and culture to beginners, and builds the
foundation skills in speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture, working toward functional
competence. Students must take placement exam if this is their first RIT class in Russian and
they have some prior study of Russian. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

MLPO-201 
Beginning Portuguese I
Beginning Portuguese I introduces the Portuguese language and culture to beginners, and builds
the foundation skills in speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture. Part of the SILP/World
languages program. Based on Brazilian Portuguese, along with study of all Lusophone countries. Students must take placement exam if this is their first RIT class in Portuguese and they
have some prior study of Portuguese. Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
MLPO-202 
Beginning Portuguese II
Beginning Portuguese II continues the first-year study of Portuguese language and culture,
including work in the present tense, the past tenses, and introducing the subjunctive mood,
continuing to build the foundation skills in speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture.
Based on Brazilian Portuguese, along with study of all Lusophone countries. Part of the SILP/
World languages program. Consult program coordinator if this is your first RIT Portuguese
course. Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Portuguese class and
they have some prior study of Portuguese. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLPO-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
MLPO-301 
Intermediate Portuguese I
Intermediate Portuguese I is the first course in the second year of Portuguese language study.
Course content concentrates on intensive grammar review, situation dialogues, conversation,
and cultural readings, and includes work in all five skills (speaking, listening, reading, writing,
culture). Part of the SILP/World languages program: consult the program coordinator if this is
your first RIT Portuguese course. Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT
Portuguese class, and they have some prior study of Portuguese. (Prerequisites: Minimum score
of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLPO-202 or MLPO-202T or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLPO-302 
Intermediate Portuguese II
Intermediate Portuguese II is the second course in the second year of Portuguese language
study. Course content concentrates on intensive grammar review, situation dialogues, letter writing (business and personal), compositions, oral presentations, and cultural readings.
Includes work in all five skills (speaking, listening, reading, writing, culture). Part of the SILP/
World languages program: consult the program coordinator if this is your first RIT Portuguese
course. Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Portuguese class, and
they have some prior study of Portuguese. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLPO-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLPO-401 
Advanced Portuguese I
This is the first course of the advanced (third) year of Portuguese language and culture study.
The course content is based on the first six films and the first two chapters of the textbook
Cinema For Portuguese Conversation (Bonnie Wasserman, Focus Publishing, 2009). Course
work covers the cultural themes, readings, grammar study, vocabulary, conversation and composition topics included in the book and the films. Practice in all five skills: speaking, listening,
reading, writing, culture. Part of the SILP/World languages program. Consult program coordinator if this is your first RIT Portuguese course. Students must take the placement exam if this
is their first RIT Portuguese class, and they have some prior study of Portuguese. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLPO-302 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLPO-402 
Advanced Portuguese II
This is the second course of the advanced (third) year of Portuguese language and culture study.
The course content is based on the last eight films and the last three chapters of the textbook
Cinema for Portuguese Conversation (Bonnie Wasserman, Focus Publishing, 2009). Course
work covers the cultural themes, readings, grammar study, vocabulary, conversation and composition topics included in the book and the films. Practice in all five skills: speaking, listening,
reading, writing, culture. Part of the SILP/World languages program. Consult program coordinator if this is your first RIT Portuguese course. Students must take the placement exam if this
is their first RIT Portuguese class, and they have some prior study of Portuguese. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLPO-401 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

MLRU-202 
Beginning Russian II
Beginning Russian II works on further development of communicative and functional skills
in speaking, listening, reading, writing, and culture in first-year Russian language. Consult
program coordinator if this is your first RIT Russian course. Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Russian class, and they have some prior study of Russian.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 1 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLRU-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
MLRU-301 
Intermediate Russian I
Intermediate Russian I starts the second year of Russian language study with intermediate-level
development of functional skills in speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture. Consult
program coordinator if this is your first RIT Russian course. Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Russian class, and they have some prior study of Russian.
(Prerequisites: Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLRU-202 or MLRU202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLRU-302 
Intermediate Russian II
Intermediate Russian II continues the second year of Russian language study with intermediate-level development of functional skills in speaking, listening, reading, writing and culture.
Consult program coordinator if this is your first RIT Russian course. Students must take the
placement exam if this is their first RIT Russian class, and they have some prior study of
Russian. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLRU-301
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLRU-401 
Advanced Russian I
Advanced Russian I, the first in the advanced (third year) sequence of Russian language courses
provides students with training in advanced-intermediate to advanced level work in all skills
(speaking, listening, reading, writing, culture), including conversation, with increased work in
reading and writing. See Coordinator of the World languages program if this is your first RIT
Russian class.Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Russian class, and
they have some prior study of Russian. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language
Placement Exam or MLRU-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLRU-402 
Advanced Russian II
Advanced Russian II, the second in the advanced (third year) sequence of Russian language
courses provides students with training in advanced level work in all skills (speaking, listening,
reading, writing, culture), including conversation, with increased work in reading and writing.
See Coordinator of the World languages program if this is your first RIT Russian class.Students
must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Russian class, and they have some prior
study of Russian. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or
MLRU-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MLRU-449 
Special Topics in Russian
An in-depth exploration of the Russian language and culture by focusing the skills/topics that
are not regularly covered in sequential regular language courses. Prerequisite: varies; contact
the instructor. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLSP-201A 
Beginning Spanish IA
Beginning Spanish IA is for true beginners of Spanish: those who have never studied the language or have very little recollection of it (the latter as acknowledged by placement test results).
This course introduces the Spanish language and the culture of Hispanic countries to beginners,
and provides a basic foundation in all skills in Spanish (speaking, listening, reading, writing,
culture) through intensive practice in a variety of media. Language work progresses from autobiographical information, through the present tense, to preliminary work in the past tenses.
Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT class in Spanish and they have
some prior study of Spanish. Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

117

College of Liberal Arts

MLSP-201B 
Beginning Spanish IB
This course is for students who have previously studied Spanish in high school or elsewhere but
who do not know the past tenses as determined by placement test results. The course strengthens students’ foundation in all skills in Spanish (speaking, listening, reading, writing, culture)
through intensive practice in a variety of media. Language work progresses from autobiographical information, through the present tense, to preliminary work in the past tenses. Students
must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT class in Spanish. (Prerequisites: Students
must have a score of 9 of the RIT Language Placement Exam.Score of 9 on LPE) Lecture 4,
Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MLSP-202 
Beginning Spanish II
This course continues the basic grammatical structures, vocabulary and situations of firstyear Spanish, with foundation work in all skills (speaking, listening, reading, writing, culture).
Beginning Spanish 2 continues work in the past tenses and includes work on the subjunctive
mood, plus the future and conditional tenses. Students work on paragraph-length speech and
writing, and move toward readiness for conversation and composition. (Prerequisites: MLSP201A or MLSP-201B or score of 1 on the placement exam or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 4 (Spring)
MLSP-301 
Intermediate Spanish I
This is the first course in the Intermediate Spanish sequence (second year). Intermediate
Spanish 1 is a course in Conversation, along with grammar review and culture study. Emphasis
is on tourist survival situation dialogues, various forms of conversation, grammar review,
and both formal and informal culture (the arts and daily behavior). The basic skills learned
in the first year courses are now put into practice. Students must take the placement exam if
this is their first RIT Spanish class, and they have some prior study of Spanish. (Prerequisites:
Minimum score of 2 on RIT Language Placement Exam or MLSP-202 or MLSP-202T or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MLSP-302 
Intermediate Spanish II
This is the second course in the Intermediate Spanish sequence (second year). Intermediate
Spanish II is a composition course, emphasizing grammar re-view, composition, business-letter
writing, Spanish for the Professions, and culture, while also including work in speaking and listening. The basic skills learned in the first year courses are now put into practice. In addition to
the language work, there is significant work on cultural topics of Spanish-speaking countries at
the intermediate level. Students must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Spanish
class, and they have some prior study of Spanish. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 3 on RIT
Language Placement Exam or MLSP-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLSP-352 
Caribbean Cinema
This course provides an introduction to Hispanic Caribbean culture through cinema studies. We will study the role of film in Hispanic Caribbean societies as well as the unique artistic
and technical achievements and obstacles of Cuban, Dominican, and Puerto Rican filmmakers. Topics covered include: The Basics of Film Analysis; An Introduction to Caribbean Film
History; The Social Context of the Hispanic Caribbean Film Industry; Art and Revolution;
Race, Ethnicity, and Religion; Occupation, Dictatorship, and War; Gender, Sexuality and Exile;
Transnationalism and Migration, and Hispanic Caribbean Film in a Global Context. This course
will take a cultural studies approach to the study of film as a social practice. Weekly films (1.52 hours in length) must be watched outside of class hours. All films with dialog have English
subtitles. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLSP-353 
Trauma and Survival in First-Person Narrative
This course introduces students to first-person narratives about trauma and survival from Latin
America, the Hispanic Caribbean, U.S. Latina/o commu-nities, and Spain. Students will learn
about Hispanic literature, culture, and history while exploring the themes of memory, community, and survival in autobiography, testimonial narrative, chronicle, memoir, epistolary
narrative, essay, and the historical novel. Through in-class discussion, presentations, reading,
and writing exercises, this course refines students’ skills in oral ex-pression, reading, writing,
and critical thinking. Students will also develop research skills as they complete a project on a
topic chosen in consultation with the instructor. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLSP-401 
Advanced Spanish I
This is the first course at the advanced level. This sequence is designed to further develop proficiency in the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. This sequence
develops the ability to understand and communicate more freely by expansion of vocabulary
and grammar, and by exposure to authentic cultural materials, both textual and visual. Students
must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Spanish class, and they have some prior
study of Spanish. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or
MLSP-302 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

118	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MLSP-402 
Advanced Spanish II
This is the second course at the advanced level. This sequence is designed to further develop
proficiency in the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. This sequence
develops the ability to understand and communicate more freely by expansion of vocabulary
and grammar, and by exposure to authentic cultural materials, both textual and visual. Students
must take the placement exam if this is their first RIT Spanish class, and they have some prior
study of Spanish. (Prerequisites: Minimum score of 4 on RIT Language Placement Exam or
MLSP-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MLST-449 
Special Topic Modern Lng
This upper-level course will focus on a specific theme or topic in modern languages, chosen
by the instructor, announced in the subtitle, and developed in the syllabus. The topics of this
course will vary, but the course number will remain the same, so be sure not to repeat the same
topic. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

History
HIST-101 
Making History
How do historians understand and interpret the past? What tools do historians use to uncover
the past? What does it mean to think historically? History is both an art and a science, and in this
course, we will learn the methods, practices, and tools used to create historical knowledge. You
will learn how to read texts with an eye toward their argument, how to ask historical questions,
how to conduct historical research, and how to write a historical narrative. At the discretion
of the instructor, the class may use examples from a particular historical era to ground course
concepts in a specific historical tradition. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-102 
Themes in US History
This introductory-level course will examine the social, cultural, political, technological and/
or economic development of modern America as it is revealed through a particular historical
topic or theme. The theme or topic of the course is chosen by the instructor, announced in the
subtitle, and developed in the syllabus. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HIST-103 
The City in History
This course offers an introduction to the study of history by exploring the history of a particular city. Cities are complicated places, where many peoples, cultures, and histories overlap and
interact. Their histories are also shaped by many forces, such as economic, cultural, demographic, social, and sexual, operating at levels from local to national to global. Studying a city
offers a window into the history of a local place as well as a nation. The choice of the city is
left up to the individual professor. Cities under study in the past have included Rochester, Las
Vegas, and Paris. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-125 
Public History and Public Debate
In late 1994, the B-29 Superfortress Enola Gay — the airplane that dropped the first atomic
bomb detonated in combat on Hiroshima, Japan — arrived at the Smithsonian National Air
and Space Museum in Washington, DC. The museum’s staff faced important questions: would
they celebrate the Enola Gay as the weapon that ended the Pacific War? Would they exhibit it
as a technological artifact that marked the dawn of nuclear warfare? Would they remind museum visitors that its potent cargo ended the lives of tens of thousands of people? These were
difficult professional questions for public historians; they were deeply ethical questions too.
Much of the past that public historians interpret is the source of great debate in the present.
Since the way history is remembered shapes public policy, community identity, and collective
understanding, the ethical stakes for public history are high. This course will examine notable
controversies in American public history and develop students’ critical perspectives on them.
Students will generate answers to the questions: What are the ethics of doing public history?
What happens when public historians remember, but the community wants to forget? When
stakeholders (e.g., historic site, community, historians, sponsors) collide, whose stories and
whose interests prevail? Who decides? How are those decisions made? Who is allowed to tell
history? To whom or to what are public historians responsible? Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-160 
History of Modern East Asia
Understanding the history of East Asia is integral to understanding the complex world that we
live in, and will help us to understand that no single nation can live in isolation. One cannot
endeavor to understand limited national entities alone; rather one must understand the interactions between cultures and across borders that help to define the world. Japan, for example,
cannot be adequately understood without reference to China, Korea, and one might argue, the
wider world. Therefore, we will undertake in this course to examine the region of East Asia
historically from about 1600 to the present, paying special attention to interactions between
the cultures and people of the region. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

HIST-170 
Twentieth Century Europe
This course examines major themes and controversies in European history from 1900 to the
present, placing particular emphasis on the early twentieth-century crisis of liberal democracy
and the political alternatives proposed to parliamentary government: right-wing nationalism,
communism, and fascism. Topics will include: the impact of World War I on European societies and politics; Popular Front movements in France and Spain; eugenics and the Nazi racial
state; the Holocaust; occupation and resistance during World War II; decolonization; student
rebellions in 1968; Cold War domestic politics; and the reshaping of post-communist and
post-colonial Europe. Special attention will be placed racial politics and immigration, state
surveillance regimes, and European debates over the Americanization and globalization of
European cultures. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-180 
Information Revolution
The internet and cell phones seem to have revolutionized our society, changing how we
learn about new things, relate to each other and understand ourselves. This course investigates the history of information and communication technologies to cast new light on these
developments. We will ask how people formed political opinions, what ethical concerns new
information and communication technologies raised, and how technologies changed the lives
of the people using them. This course helps students understand the social, cultural, and ethical implications of “revolutionary” information and communication technologies. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-190 
American Women’s History
This course surveys women’s history in the United States from the colonial period to present. The course moves chronologically and thematically, focusing on the diversity of women’s
experiences across race, class, and geography as well as the construction of dominant gender
norms. Topics include Native American, African American, and Euro-American women in
colonial America; the Industrial Revolution and the ideology of domesticity, Women in the
American West; women’s paid and unpaid work; sexuality and reproduction; women’s activism; and women’s experiences of immigration and family life. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-191 
The History of the Family in the U.S.
The family is at the center of contemporary political debates involving social policies, gender
roles, citizenship, marriage, and the role of the state. Politicians and commentators frequently
invoke a mythical American family, one that is conflict-free, independent, and unchanging.
These idealized depictions mask a far more complicated and richer historical reality of the
development of family structures in the U.S. This course will examine both the diverse experiences of actual families in the American past, and changing ideologies about the family and
its social role. Students will have the opportunity to write a history of their own family, or to
complete an alternative research paper. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-199 
Survey of American Military History
This course is a survey of military history and will study the interaction between society and
military institutions, technology and techniques, from 1637 to the present. Additionally, the
course will examine the interrelationships of warfare, technology and society in American history. The course will focus on such questions as how changing "styles" of warfare, the composition
of the military establishment (militias, citizen armies, paid professionals, mercenaries), and
the transformations in military technology have impacted upon state and society. Conversely,
it will also investigate how political and societal changes have influenced the nature of warfare
in American history. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HIST-201 
Histories of Globalization
This course examines narratives of globalization as human process. We will focus on contemporary and historical issues that are routinely conceived of as affecting or pertaining to the
world’s population in its entirety, such as human rights, humanitarianism, environmental
degradation, trade, and military power. The world and its population will feature as a unit of
analysis, and an emphasis will be placed on issues that appear to be in tension with the role of
the nation-state and nationality, and highlight world and global citizenship. We will explore
critiques of the conceptualization of globality and worldliness as a factor in determining social,
cultural, and historical change. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HIST-210 
Introduction to Africa and the Diaspora
This course is an introduction to the study of an enormous continent, Africa and its Diaspora.
Because of the dimensions of the geography, population and time covered, one of the main purposes of this course is to pave the way to narrower regional or thematic classes. This course will
emphasize the interdisciplinarity of African and Diaspora studies. We will explore contrasting
and complementing disciplinary perspectives on Africa and its Diaspora. We will move our
way through African and Diasporic cultures and histories both temporally and thematically.
Lectures will introduce key themes and ideas, and you will discuss textual and visual evidence
for African and Diasporic communities, cultures and ideas. This course is suitable to those new
to the study of Africa and its Diaspora, and to those who are considering taking further classes
or seminars in African and/or Diasporic studies. Lecture, Credits 3

	

HIST-230 
American Deaf History
This course explores the history of the deaf community in the United States. It offers a broad
survey of American deaf history from the early nineteenth century to the late twentieth century.
Major events in American deaf history will be considered, including the foundation of schools
for the deaf, the birth of American Sign Language, the emergence of deaf culture, the challenge
of oralism, the threat of eugenics, and the fight for civil rights. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-238 
History of Disability
This course will explore the meaning of disability in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The
course provides a cultural over-view of disability and seeks to explore the social construction of
disability, with special attention given to the cultural, intellectu-al, personal, and social histories
of disability. Disability in history has been many (frequently contradictory) things: acquired
at birth and acquired by war; a reason to promote eugenic policies or a reason to promote civil
rights legislation; a medical diagnosis or a personal identity; visible in the body (as in the case
of amputations) or invisible (as in the case of deafness); a source of family shame or a source
of personal pride. How has the meaning and nature of disability changed over time? How can
we understand the cultural meaning of the body in history? The course seeks to explore and
explain these shifting meanings of disabil-ity within the context of Western history. Specific
topics to be considered include freak shows, disabled veterans, prosthetic technologies, disability as culture, the history of eugenics, and political activism. Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HIST-240 
Civil War America
This class will examine American politics and society during the Civil War era. In addition to
military affairs, students will focus on several broader themes, including the political, economic
and social factors leading to the Civil War in the 1860s; the role of abolitionist, slave expansionist, and black freedom movements in the years before the Civil War; the development of
emancipation policies during and after the war; and the reconstruction of the union following
the war. Students will also examine the international dimensions of the Civil War as well as
the way subsequent generations of Americans remembered it in history books, memoirs, and
museums. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-245 
American Slavery and Freedom
This class will survey the history of slavery and freedom in the United States from the establishment of global slave systems in the colonial period through emancipation movements during
the Civil War era. Students will examine key economic, political and social issues (from the
development of slave labor systems to strategies of resistance among enslaved peoples) as well
as the meaning of black freedom struggles during key eras (such as the American Revolutionary
era and Civil War). Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-250 
Origins of U.S. Foreign Relations
This class analyzes the roots of U.S. foreign policy, beginning with the American Revolution and
continuing through the Spanish-American War. It also examines the development of the United
States from a small eighteenth-century experiment in democracy into a late nineteenth-century
imperial power. Topics include foreign policy powers in the constitution, economic development, continental and overseas expansion, and Manifest Destiny. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-251 
Modern U.S. Foreign Relations
This course examines the late nineteenth-century emergence of the United States as an imperial
power and its development into a twentieth-century superpower. Topics include U.S. politics and foreign policy, the influence of racial and cultural ideologies on policy, isolation and
intervention, the cold war, and the Afghanistan and Iraq wars. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-252 
The United States and Japan
This class examines the U.S.-Japanese relationship from the perspectives of diplomacy, economics, and culture. Fluctuating sharply during its 150 years, this relationship has featured
gunboat diplomacy, racial conflict, war, and alliance. The course investigates U.S.-Japanese
relations in the contexts of modernization, imperialism, World War II, the cold war, and the
twenty-first century. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-275 
Screening the Trenches: the History of WWI Through Film
This course uses popular films to examine World War I as the global conflict that set the
stage for the rise of communism, fascism, and subsequent wars in twentieth-century Europe.
Students will gain an understanding of the major causes and outcomes of World War I while
investigating how the war transformed class, gender, and racial politics in Europe. Special
attention will be paid to the combat/trench experience, the home front/war front divide, the
German occupation of Belgium and Northern France, “total war,” the politics of shell-shock and
disability, and the legacies of grief, mourning, and commemoration. Because World War I so
greatly divided its participants, little consensus about the war’s meaning emerged in its aftermath. Filmmakers have consequently used World War I as a “blank slate” on which to project
political fantasies, condemn elements of their own societies, or imagine the future. Students
will use secondary historical literature and original primary sources to analyze filmic representations of World War I and consider how filmmakers have deliberately misrepresented the
past or constructed particular narratives about the war to serve their own ends. This course
will therefore equip students to think critically about representations of the historical past in
popular culture. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

119

College of Liberal Arts

HIST-280 
History of Modern Germany
This course covers major themes in German history from the formation of the German Empire
in 1870 to the present. Topics include nation building and nationalism, industrialization and
urbanization, imperialism at home and abroad, the first world war, the Weimar Republic, Nazi
racism and the second world war, the divided Germany and the Cold War, and reunification
and the fall of the Berlin Wall. The course may focus on specific questions such as gender, class,
religion or race and ethnicity. This course leads you to explore how German history shaped
the role of Germans and Germany in the world today as well as how it informs problems facing other regions and eras. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-290 
U.S. History Since 1945
This class examines U.S. history from WWII to present, with emphasis on political, social and
cultural change. Focuses on the meanings and boundaries of American citizenship, as well as
the role of the U.S. in the world. Topics include the Cold War and McCarthyism; the GI Bill
and the building of a suburban middle class; consumer culture and its critics; The Civil Rights
Movement; Great Society liberalism; The Vietnam War, the New Left and the New Right, and
the counterculture; feminism, the Religious Right, and changes in gender roles, sexuality and
family life; deindustrialization and economic restructuring; globalism and immigration policy;
the War on Drugs and the growth of a penal state; the end of the Cold War and the New World
Order; and the War on Terror. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-301 
Great Debates in US History
This course offers an analysis and interpretation of the main themes in the history of the United
States over a broad period of time that extends to the modern era. We will look at how issues
such as race, class, gender, and the environment have shaped American history, as well as
debates over the multiple meanings of that history. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-302 
Special Topics in History
This upper-level course will focus on a specific theme or topic in history, chosen by the instructor, announced in the subtitle, and developed in the syllabus. The topics of this course will vary,
but the course number will remain the same, so be sure not to repeat the same topic. Class 3,
Credit 3 (annually) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-321 
Special Topics in Public History
Public history is the practice of history for, and by, audiences outside the classroom. This course
will focus on a specific theme or topic in public history, chosen by the instructor, announced
in the subtitle, and developed in the syllabus. The topics of this course will vary, but the course
number will remain the same, so be sure not to repeat the same topic. Lecture, Credits 3
(Spring)
HIST-322 
Monuments and Memory
Monuments are physical objects that were constructed to help us remember the past, but
a deeper analysis reveals that the relationship between monuments and the memories they
embody is complex and changes over time. We will tackle the process of memorializing, the
monuments that result, and seek greater insight into the arguments these artifacts make about
the past, the present, and our place in the world. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-326 
Doing History in a Digital World
Digital history is a nebulous concept, but at its core is a recognition that the widespread availability of computers and their networks has fundamentally altered the way history is produced
and consumed. Sources in digital format simultaneously present opportunities and challenges
that force us to rethink what is possible in history. Digital tools including blogs, wikis, video
sharing sites, and many others help bring history to new audiences in different ways. In this
course, we will investigate the landscape of digital history and tackle the exciting task of creating and understanding history in the digital age. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-330 
Deafness and Technology
The deaf community has a long and complicated relationship with technological devices. The
deaf community, for instance, was quick to embrace the new technology of moving pictures,
and many deaf actors found work in early Hollywood during the silent film era. Most lost
their livelihoods when sound was introduced to motion pictures. Deaf people were left out of
the communication revolution brought about by the telephone for many years, but now the
deaf community is increasingly a wired community, as texting, tweeting, and blogging makes
more communication technologies accessible to deaf users. This course will explore the historical relationship between technology and deafness. It will consider how views of deafness
frequently shape technology, that is, if deafness is viewed as a pathological illness, technologies
are focused on curing it (e.g., cochlear implants), whereas, if deaf people are viewed as members
of linguistic and cultural minority, technologies are harnessed to make it easier for that minority to interact with the majority culture (e.g, relay systems). It will consider how deaf people
have used, created, and adopted technologies to their own ends. It will also explore the complicated, and controversial, relationship between Deaf people and medical technologies such
as hearing aids, cochlear implants, and in vitro fertilization (IVF). Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

120	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

HIST-333 
Diversity in the Deaf Community
Students in this course will be introduced to the study of diversity in the Deaf community
related to race, ethnicity, sexuality and other factors. Students will learn to analyze the implications of such diversity in terms of self-perception, self-esteem, and acculturation. Students
also will learn how the Deaf experience transcends race, ethnicity and other factors to bond
members of the Deaf community and help define Deaf culture. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-334 
Oppression in the Lives of Deaf People
Students in this course will examine various forms of oppression across different cultures
and communities. Students will analyze the influence of oppression on minority groups with
respect to resistance and the struggle for social justice. Finally, students will examine and
apply experiences of other minority groups in recent history to the Deaf community. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-345 
Environmental Disasters
This class will survey the history environmental disasters (from floods to oil spills) in modern American and global society. Students will study several specific disasters (for example,
Hurricane Katrina, the Great Midwestern Floods of the 1990s, Love Canal, and the Haitian
Earthquake of 2008) and analyze a series of broader themes that illuminate their meaning,
including the economic impact of various disasters, the legal and political ramifications of
modern disasters, and the social and cultural meaning of disasters in various societies. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-350 
Terrorism, Intelligence, and War
This course investigates the historical, political, moral, and legal dimensions of terrorism,
intelligence, and war. It uses a case-study approach with themes that include just war theory,
terrorism in the colonial and post-colonial worlds, domestic terrorism, and mechanisms of
intelligence and covert operations. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-365 
Conflict in Modern East Asia
The twentieth century has sometimes been called the Pacific Century, which is ironic since
this period of time has been anything but pacific! The twentieth century saw the rise of four
great pacific powers; the US, Japan, China and the Soviet Union, and saw the eclipse of several
others, including the British and French Empires. Furthermore a major front of the Cold War
was played out on the Asian continent, namely the Korean and Vietnam wars, as well as the
US standoff with Communist China. And of course the Second World War, the greatest concentrated period of human destruction, played out at the midpoint of the twentieth century.
This class will analyze these conflicts both as conflicts in and of themselves, but will also look
at the backdrop against which these conflicts were played out. Beginning with the subjugation
of China in the 19th century, our class will examine the many conflicts that defined this region
through the end of the twentieth century. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HIST-380 
International Business History
This course provides an overview on the history of international business since the late 19th
century. We will examine social change over time in how corporations have handled expansion into foreign markets, why corporations decided to — or not to — expand abroad, how
they managed their foreign operations, and what contributed to their success or failure abroad.
To do so, we will look at a variety of factors including how corporations dealt with corporate
communication, local regulations, transfers of knowledge and technology, and how corporate
decisions affect communities. We will apply these historical insights to case studies of multinational corporations. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-381 
Technology in the Modern World
Trains, planes, automobiles, phones and computers — modern technologies like these make
our daily lives pleasant and convenient. Yet, many people around the globe lack access to these
technologies. In this course, we will investigate the emergence of industrial manufacturing processes in late 18th century Britain that allowed for the development of these technologies. We
will also examine how new technologies spread to other places in the world, how they shaped
colonial relations, and what role they play in today’s developing world. In this course, you will
gain a better understanding of how people around the world have shaped their technologies,
and how technologies in turn have shaped them. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-390 
Medicine and Public Health in American History
This course introduces students to the social and cultural history of medicine by examining differing concepts of disease, health, and healing throughout American history. Themes include
the professionalization of medicine, the role of science in medical research and practice, popular understanding and experience of health and illness, and the role of the state in providing
medical care. We will explore how science and medicine defined social categories of difference, including race and gender, and how these categories in turn shaped medical thought and
practice. The course format combines lectures, discussions, and films and readings include
historical documents and case studies. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

HIST-402 
Special Seminar in History
This upper-level small group seminar will focus on a specific theme or topic in history, chosen by the instructor, announced in the subtitle, and developed in the syllabus. All sections
of this course are writing intensive. The topics of this course will vary, but the course number will remain the same, so be sure not to repeat the same topic. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-421 
Hands-on History
Get hands-on experience researching, interpreting, and writing history. The class will tackle a
common historical theme (announced in the subtitle), then do original historical research on
a topic of your choice within the overall theme. Our themes do not just rehash old topics with
little new information to uncover. Instead, we focus on relatively unexplored areas of the past,
where your research can shed new light on unknown topics. You will learn about history by
doing it! All majors are welcome. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-431 
Theory and Methods of Deaf Geographies
The course is designed to give students theoretical and practical exposure to qualitative social
science applied research methods in a new area of human geographic and Deaf Studies research:
Deaf Geographies. Deaf Geographies reside at the intersection of Human Geography and Deaf
Studies. It considers spatiality, language, citizenship, education, and identity, as well as other
themes of interest in new ways by viewing these through the eyes of a community who perform
their cultural and social geographies in the visual. The focus of the course is an instructor-led
research project. Students will gain a grounding in appropriate methodological theory in order
to conduct hands-on, primary research that will include proposal writing, data collection,
analysis, and dissemination. (Prerequisite: 2nd - 4th year standing.Corequisite: HIST-430 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Summer)
HIST-439 
Biography as History
This course will look at biography as a form of history. By studying biographies that approach
their subjects with various formats and methods of presentation, the class will examine how
the craft of biography shapes our contemporary understanding of the historical past. Among
the questions to be examined in this course are: how does biography reveal the historical circumstances of the subject’s life to give readers a broader understanding of the historical context
of that life? How effectively can contemporary readers explore the past through the prism of
one person’s life? Can the history of an era be effectively told through an examination of one
person’s life? What are the benefits of the biographical approach to history? What are the drawbacks? What are the benefits of biography as a form of public history? That is, when people
can get their history through the Biography Channel, how important is it for public historians
to grapple with the impact of biography as a form with a unique grip on the public imagination? Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
HIST-450 
Modern Japan in History, Fiction, and Film
This course offers an introduction to modern Japanese history, highlighting social and aesthetic
traditions that have formed the foundations for Japanese literature and cinema. It explores how
writers and directors have drawn on this heritage to depict historical experiences. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
HIST-462 
East-West Encounters
The Age of Discovery, beginning in the fifteenth century and culminating with the advent of
European imperialism, is one of the most fascinating, as well as problematic, periods in the
history of both Asia and Europe. Too often historians frame the interaction between Asia and
Europe in uniquely European terms and present Asia as a passive partner in this process of
discovery. In fact, this period presents us with a number of complex issues such as national identity, the nature of European expansion, and the Asian response to European journeys to the East.
This course will undertake to re-examine the age of discovery not only from a European point
of view, but also from an Asian standpoint. In the process, we will see how many of the issues
that we are facing in the region are products of a long and complex relationship between Europe
and Asia. Students will also examine the issues that have arisen between the east and the west
in the twentieth century and that continue into our own time. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
HIST-465 
Samurai in Word and Image
One of the most enduring images of premodern Japan in the samurai, replete with sword and
armor. This course will seek to examine the role of the samurai in Japanese history, examining
popular perceptions in Japanese film, woodblock prints, and texts. We will also use a variety
of secondary sources to critically examine some of the portrayals of the samurai and how they
stand up to historical reality. Students will be encouraged to participate in extensive discussions as we deal with a great variety of media and try to arrive at an image of the samurai that
is historically accurate. And finally, we will examine issues such as feudalism and the warrior code and how those historical concepts relate to the west at about the same time period.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

HIST-470 
Science, Tech, and European Imperialism: 1800-1965
Between 1800 and 1945, Western nations dominated approximately three-quarters of the
earth’s surface through imperialism. This course examines how industrialization, technological developments, and the emergence of the modern “sciences” facilitated Europe’s conquest
and colonization of vast territories overseas. The course opens with a brief overview of the
role of biology and science in shaping early imperial encounters (the Columbian Exchange).
Students will then consider how 19th-century botany, zoology, acclimatization, cartography,
geography, and anthropology became “imperial” sciences that facilitated formal conquest
by producing knowledge about distant cultures, “races,” and environments. The Industrial
Revolution produced new technological “tools” — steamboats, railroads, and weapons —
that facilitated the “Scramble” for territory in the late 19th century. The course will consider
how these inventions shaped patterns of conquest and colonial rule in the late 19th and early
20th centuries. Throughout the course, students will interrogate how Europeans’ faith in the
superiority of Western technology, scientific knowledge, and medicine shaped the evolution
of the European “civilizing mission” — the cultural and political logic that defined interactions between Europeans and non-Western populations. At the same time, they will evaluate
how Africans and Asians experienced living under colonial rule, and in some cases, how they
deployed Western technology as weapons of resistance to imperialism. Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Spring)
HIST-480 
Global Information Age
The internet and cell phones seem to have turned us into world citizens of cyberspace.
Programmers in Bangalore or Chennay now write software for US companies, and doctors in
India or Australia interpret the Cat-Scan or MRI images of US patients overnight. As bestselling author Thomas Friedman argues, “the world is flat,” that is competition for intellectual
work is now global. Others have suggested that information technologies have led to global homogenization, with people around the world reading the same news, listening to the
same music, and purchasing the same products. In this class, we will investigate the history
of information and communication technologies to cast new light on these claims about our
present-day technologies. This class is a small seminar which includes a research project.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Interdisciplinary-Liberal Arts
ITDL-101 
Career Exploration Seminar
This seminar is designed to introduce students to the process by which they can make an
informed decision in selecting career options and identifying an educational program which
will lead to their career goals. With the assistance of facilitators familiar with assessment instruments, careers and the RIT programs, students begin by assessing their interests, values, skills
and personal traits. Students will be introduced to online and print resources used for researching occupational information and may be asked to interview faculty and administrators as well
as professionals working in fields in which they are interested. Students will complete a variety of activities including class discussions, journal entries, papers and presentations, allowing
them the opportunity to reflect on information gathered throughout the course. Students in the
University Studies and Liberal Arts Exploration programs are required to complete this course
successfully in the first term of their program. Seminar, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
ITDL-151H 
Explorations of Place and Space
This honors seminar is a foundational course that examines how our social worlds are linked
to our natural and built worlds. The corresponding emphasis on inquiry, analysis, and interpretation facilitates student-engaged learning. In exploring pertinent place and space related
issues/topics through an experiential, active, and site-specific curricular focused learning, various aspects of the human condition are discovered. The theme or topic of this honors seminar,
as chosen by the instructor, is announced in the subtitle as well as course notes and is developed
in the syllabus. The honors seminar integrates the required YearOne curriculum. Class 3, Credit
3 (F) (This class is restricted to students in the Honors program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ITDL-450 
Honors Capstone Seminar: Global Engagements
This capstone seminar constitutes the final requirement for students in the honors program,
providing a culminating senior project experience. Students will enroll in this course in their
final year of study. The seminar will further develop and sharpen the student’s understanding of how their work is affected by a global context. The course uses a problem-solving focus,
culminating in a written senior thesis and project presentation. Counts as honors program
requirement (This class is restricted to degree seeking students with at least 4th year level.)
Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

121

College of Liberal Arts

International and Global Studies
INGS-101 
Global Studies
Within the past three decades, planetary computerization, burgeoning media industries, and
other global processes have significantly altered the ways in which we experience our local and
global worlds. Global reconfigurations of time and space change our consciousness, sense of
self and others, and the material realities in which we live and work. This course provides the
conceptual tools to assess emerging global processes, interactions and flows of people, ideas
and things that challenge historical patterns of international studies and relations. The course
will introduce you to international and global processes in areas such as global cultural economies, global cities, new forms of democracy and civil society, global religions, sexualities,
health, and environments, increased competition for resources, political conflict, war and terrorism. Beyond understanding the causes and consequences of global change, this course will
introduce you to ethical dilemmas in global justice movements, and in transferring ideas and
technologies in new global contexts. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

INGS-502 
Advanced Research
Seminar for majors in international and global studies. Upon successful completion of the
capstone seminar, qualified students may engage in enhanced research in a specific area or
dimension of their capstone project under the supervision of a faculty expert. May be taken
either as an elective in the advanced study option in international and global studies or as an
institute elective. Under the supervision of and collaboration with a faculty expert, the students
will further explore, investigate, and rewrite an aspect of their senior project for a conference
presentation, for publication, or for enhancement of expertise in their selected field specialization. (Prerequisites: INGS-501 or equivalent course.) Seminar, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
INGS-597 
Study Abroad
Students will develop skills in critical thinking, ethical reasoning, problem-solving, and communication in an international setting through participating in a Study Abroad program (at
least four weeks). (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

INGS-201 
Histories of Globalization
This course examines narratives of globalization as human process. We will focus on contemporary and historical issues that are routinely conceived of as affecting or pertaining to the
world’s population in its entirety, such as human rights, humanitarianism, environmental
degradation, trade, and military power. The world and its population will feature as a unit of
analysis, and an emphasis will be placed on issues that appear to be in tension with the role of
the nation-state and nationality, and highlight world and global citizenship. We will explore
critiques of the conceptualization of globality and worldliness as a factor in determining social,
cultural, and historical change. Lecture, Credits 3

INGS-598 Internship
Internship in a field related to international and global studies (at least 160 hours of work,
completed over at least four weeks). Students will apply the accumulated knowledge, theory,
and methods of the discipline to problem solving outside of the classroom. (Enrollment in
this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) INT, Credits 0 - 16
(Fall, Spring, Summer)

INGS-210 
Introduction to Africa and the Diaspora
This course is an introduction to the study of an enormous continent, Africa and its Diaspora.
Because of the dimensions of the geography, population and time covered, one of the main purposes of this course is to pave the way to narrower regional or thematic classes. This course will
emphasize the interdisciplinarity of African and Diaspora studies. We will explore contrasting
and complementing disciplinary perspectives on Africa and its Diaspora. We will move our
way through African and Diasporic cultures and histories both temporally and thematically.
Lectures will introduce key themes and ideas, and you will discuss textual and visual evidence
for African and Diasporic communities, cultures and ideas. This course is suitable to those new
to the study of Africa and its Diaspora, and to those who are considering taking further classes
or seminars in African and/or Diasporic studies. Lecture, Credits 3

MUSE-223 
Historic Photographic Processes
This is a studio based class in which student recreate a number of different nineteenth century photographic processes. Students will explore the history of photographic technology
through use of primary sources and hands on projects. The chemistry and deterioration of the
materials will be reviewed through the use of primary texts, projects and discussion. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

INGS-270 
Cuisine, Culture and Power
Physically, culturally, and socially, humans live through food and drink. Spanning the globe, as
nearly limitless omnivores, humans have developed myriad ways of collecting and cultivating
food and taking advantage of local environments. We also put food to work for us socially by
creating cuisine. Through cuisine, we forge and nourish relationships, commune with deities,
and through luxury choices, demonstrate our "taste" and lay claim to elite status. Through the
cultural practices of production and consumption of food and drink, we wield power. Food
and drink consumption patterns have sustained slavery, poverty, malnutrition, and illegal
immigration, and have laid waste to the environment. In this class, we explore physical, cultural, social, political, and economic dimensions of food and become more aware of how the
private, intimate act of a bite connects us to the rest of humanity. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INGS-455 
Economics of Native America
This course will analyze current and historic economic issues faced by Native Americans. It
will also examine government policies enacted by and directed toward Native Americans with
a focus on their economic implications. This will be done using standard economic models
of the labor market, poverty, trade, development and gaming. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
INGS-489 
Special Topics
This course introduces a topic new to the International and Global Studies curriculum. Topic
varies by semester. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
INGS-499 Co-op
Paid work experience in a field related to international and global studies (at least 160 hours
of work, completed over at least four weeks). Students will apply the accumulated knowledge,
theory, and methods of the discipline to problem solving outside of the classroom. (This class
is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0
(Fall, Spring, Summer)

122	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

Museum Studies

MUSE-224 
History and Theory of Exhibitions
Art exhibitions are organized around a curatorial premise, a statement that articulates an idea
allowing for the selection of work included in an exhibition. This course begins with an overview of exhibition history, starting with the transformation of the Louvre into the first public
art museum following the French Revolution, where art history, a discipline developed in the
19th century, was enlisted to organize exhibition. The course then examines the proliferation
of types of exhibitions that accompanies modernism, up to the present, paying close attention
to the curatorial premise animating the exhibitions. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MUSE-225 
Museums and the Digital Age
The digital revolution has profoundly influenced how we think about the world around us.
Information once available only to experts is now accessible digitally to a much broader audience. Museums, archives, and libraries have adapted to this democratization of knowledge and
decentralization of access in myriad ways. As visitors to museums — whether online or onsite
— each of us is part of the creation, consumption, and reception of digital information. What
does this mean for museums and for us as audiences and consumers of such information?
How has the combination of digital technology and social media increased visitors’ abilities
for interaction with cultural institutions, their collections, and other visitors? This course will
examine the history and evolution of museum practices as they adapt to new technologies and
rethink traditional museum practices. The course has no pre-requisite and is open to students
of all majors. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MUSE-340 
Introduction to Archival Studies
This course introduces students to the role of archives in the construction of a society’s cultural
heritage and historical identity. Archives are repositories of a culture’s original documents,
both paper and electronic, and they function as a site for the construction, preservation, and
dissemination of historical memory, as a source for social responsibility, and as a tool for the
understanding of the cultural, social, and political forces that influence events. The course will
examine the history of archives, the theory and practice that guide the work of archivists, and
examine the basic components of an archival program: including acquisition and appraisal,
arrangement and description, preservation and legal and ethical issues related to access to
archival records. The class will also cover the transformation of the profession in the digital age,
including digital preservation, the work of archival appraisal and collection building in an age of
digital proliferation, and archival collection management systems. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Liberal Arts

MUSE-341 
Museum Education and Interpretation
This course introduces students to the educational mission of the museum and to the museum’s
role in educating citizens for participation in a democratic, pluralistic society. As sites of informal learning, museums have an educational impact on our lives beyond our formal schooling.
The course focuses on a wide range of educational activities within museums that address visitors of all ages as individuals and as members of a democratic society, and helps to foster in
them a sense of community, civic responsibility, tolerance for multiple viewpoints, and lifelong
love of learning. The course examines the institutional shift from a fixed, scholarly approach
to exhibiting collections to one that embraces the concept of interpretation, where visitors are
encouraged to engage in a variety of experiences, make their own connections with objects
and other visitors, and ultimately construct their own meanings. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MUSE-354 
Exhibition Design
This course examines the history and practice of exhibition design. It reviews the history of
exhibitions within the development of museum-like institutions. In this course the following
aspects of exhibition design are considered: curatorial premise or theme, exhibition development timeline, exhibition site, contracts and contractual obligations, budgets and fundraising,
publicity material, didactic material, and exhibition design. The course includes field trips to
local institutions and collections throughout the quarter. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MUSE-355 
Fundraising, Grant Writing, and Marketing for Nonprofit Institutions
This course examines the growing autonomy of collecting institutions as they are cut off from
various forms of governmental sponsorship and public subsidy and their subsequent needs
for raising money from outside, non-traditional sources. The course looks at issues of needs
assessment, budgeting, and strategic planning. It focuses on the design and implementation
of effective fundraising campaigns, as well as on the organization and writing of successful
grant proposals. It also considers the importance of marketing to overall institutional success.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
MUSE-357 
Collections Management and Museum Administration
This course presents an overview of the administration and management of museums and their
collections. The course examines the governance structure of museums, focusing on personnel responsible for their administration, curation and education, and operations, as well as on
the mission statement and policies they determine. The course also details the management
of collections, including the development of a collections policy, management of that policy,
documentation and record keeping, acquisitions, and the creation/management of exhibitions.
Finally, the course considers collections care or preventive conservation, looking at both the
facility and collections. Throughout the quarter, legal and ethical issues pertaining to museums
and their collections will be emphasized. (Prerequisites: MUSE-220 or 0533-421 or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
MUSE-358 
Legal and Ethical Issues for Collecting Institutions
This course presents an overview of the legal and ethical issues that govern the institutions
and personnel involved in collecting cultural resources. Collecting institutions are governed
by national, state, and local laws that define how facilities and collections are used and this
course will consider them, as well as the larger social and historical context out of which they
developed. The course will consider the evolution of the museum as a public institution and
how the legal system increasingly defined minimum standards for maintaining collections,
the facilities in which they are housed, and guaranteeing public access; in addition legal standards for the collection will be studied, including definitions of ownership, what this means in
terms of intellectual property rights, copyright, reproduction (traditional and electronic), and
deaccessioning/disposal. These will be studied within the context of the society within which
the institution functions. The course will also study the development of national and international ethical standards and will examine the codes of behavior that govern the personal
and professional conduct of museum professionals and the practices that comprise conflicts
of interest. Ethical standards for collecting institutions will also be considered, particularly
those that address the responsibilities to a collection, the ethics of acquisition, the question of
illicit or stolen material, the issues of human remains and objects of sacred significance, and
repatriation. Attention will be paid to the changes in society that made these issues critical for
collecting institutions. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MUSE-359 
Cultural Informatics
This course introduces students to Cultural Informatics, the interdisciplinary field that
examines the intersections of information technologies, information science, and cultural
information centered in museums, libraries, and archives. Among the topics to be examined
are: how information technologies are used in museums, libraries, and archives; how modern
information systems have shaped the museum environment; the nature of convergence; the
development of digital collections, digital curation, and online exhibitions; and the role and
status of the information professional in the museum and cultural organizations. The course
is designed around projects, case studies, and readings so that students gain hands-on experience working with information. The course has no pre-requisite and is open to students of all
majors. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

MUSE-360 
Visitor Engagement and Museum Technologies
All of us, as museum visitors, have the capacity to engage with collections and to create meanings as a result of such interaction. This course considers the history and theory of visitor
engagement at museums, galleries, and sites of cultural heritage tourism; examines the import
of technology into this history; and articulates the role of visitors as “participants” who curate
their own experiences. Two key questions will be addressed in this course: 1) How does technology provide a platform for contribution, collaboration, co-creation, and co-opting of
experiences among all visitors? and 2) Can technology mediate the best possible experience
for visitors? The course has no pre-requisite and is open to students of all majors. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
MUSE-489 
Research Methods
This class introduces students to the methods of research appropriate for scholarship in the
field of Museum Studies. Students will learn how to locate, analyze, assess, critique and conduct
research in the field. They will choose the topic of their senior thesis project, develop a clear
statement of how that topic will be explored, and construct an annotated bibliography relevant
to that topic. This course leads to the development of a proposal for a senior thesis project that
is suitable for full implementation in Senior Thesis for Museum Studies. (This class is restricted
to students with at least 3rd year standing in MUSEUM-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MUSE-490 
Senior Thesis in Museum Studies
The Senior Thesis in Museum Studies is the final requirement in the degree program. Students
will conduct the appropriate research to address the topic they had proposed in Research
Methods. They will present their results as a formal written thesis and in an appropriate public
forum. The course provides students the opportunity to develop their research and practical
skills and to share the results with the department and the college. (Prerequisites: MUSE-489
or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MUSE-491 
Senior Thesis I
The Senior Thesis in Museum Studies I is the first course in the final sequence required for
completion of the degree program. In this section, students will work with their thesis advisors
to define their senior thesis project, engage in preliminary research, write an abstract containing the thesis statement/research question, construct their formal thesis proposal, and develop
a plan of work for Senior Thesis in Museum Studies II. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Seminar, Credits 1 (Spring)
MUSE-492 
Senior Thesis II
The Senior Thesis in Museum Studies II is the second course in the final sequence required
for completion of the degree program. In this section, under the guidance of their thesis advisors, students will to their research and write their literature review. They will also revise their
content outline based on this research. Finally, they will develop a new plan of work for the
completion of their thesis in Senior Thesis in Museum Studies III. (Prerequisites: MUSE-491
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 2 (Fall)
MUSE-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an
independent study are provided in College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent Study,
Credits 1 - 12 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Philosophy
PHIL-101 
Introduction to Philosophy
An introduction to some of the major problems, methods and insights of philosophy with readings from both classical and contemporary sources. Lecture, Credits 3
PHIL-102 
Introduction to Moral Issues
This course examines ethical questions that arise in the course of day-to-day individual and
social life. Some consideration will be given to ethical theory and its application to such questions, but emphasis will be on basic moral questions and practical issues. Examples of typical
issues to be examined are: What are the grounds for moral obligations like keeping promises
or obeying the law? How do we reason about what to do? Examples of typical moral issues that
may be introduced are capital punishment, euthanasia, abortion, corporate responsibility, the
treatment of animals, and so forth. Lecture, Credits 3
PHIL-103 
Critical Thinking
An introduction to philosophical analysis, especially as it may be applied in contexts other
than professional philosophy, but also including normative issues such as ethics and aesthetics. Lecture 3, Credits 3 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

123

College of Liberal Arts

PHIL-201 
Ancient Philosophy
This course examines the origin and development of Western philosophy in ancient Greece
from Thales in the sixth century down to at least the fourth century B.C.E., concentrating on
the central ideas of the pre-Socratics, the Sophists, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Some attention
might also be given to the Hellenistic philosophers (Epicureans, Stoics, and Sceptics). This was
a period of remarkable intellectual creativity in philosophy, mathematics, medicine, rhetorical
theory, ethics, aesthetics and cosmology. Questions to be considered in this course will include:
What are the nature and limits of knowledge? Is knowledge even possible? What is the nature
of language? How reliable is perception? What is the true nature of reality? What is the origin
and nature of the material world? Is moral knowledge possible? What is the nature of happiness,
and what sort of life would make people happy? Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-202 
Foundations of Moral Philosophy
This course is a survey of foundational, and normative, approaches to moral philosophy and
their motivating moral questions. Topics will include virtue ethics, deontology, consequentialism, and other approaches. Some of the questions to be examined are: How is human nature
related to morality? What are the grounds for moral obligations? Is there an ultimate moral
principle? How do we reason about what to do? Can reason determine how we ought to live?
What are moral judgments? Are there universal goods? What constitutes a morally worthwhile
life? Can morality itself be challenged? Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-203 
Modern Philosophy
This course examines the history of modern philosophy, from Descartes through Kant. It concentrates on the development of modern thought, examining the concepts of mind, body, and
causation among others. This period marked the beginning of modern science, with a rich ferment of ideas, and the philosophy of the period is essential to understanding modern science
as well as contemporary problems about consciousness, mind/body interaction, causation, and
so on. Questions to be considered in this course include the following: What can we know?
How do we come to know what we can know? What is the scope and what are the limits of our
knowledge? What is the nature of reality? Do we have access to reality? How is causal interaction possible, if at all? Does God exist, and if so, how do we know and what relation does God
have to the world? Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-204 
Introduction to Logic
An introduction to systematic methods of reasoning, such as induction, syllogistic, propositional and predicate logic, along with some associated philosophical issues, such as the nature
of truth, future contingents, abduction, scientific method, and human vs. machine reasoning.
More advanced topics might be touched on, such as modal logic, and fuzzy logic. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-301 
Philosophy of Religion
This course will examine critically definitions, assumptions, and arguments central to religion.
Topics may include interpreting the nature of religion, arguments for and against the existence
of God, the relation between theology and philosophy, the relation between God and the world,
paganism, the problem of evil, and the nature of religious language and experience. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-302 
Symbolic Logic
An introduction to symbolic, or formal, deductive logic and techniques, such as truth tables,
truth trees, and formal derivations. The emphasis will be on propositional (or sentential) logic
and first-order predicate logic. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-303 
Philosophy of Art/Aesthetics
This course introduces students to thinking philosophically about the nature of art and its
relation to other human experiences. Among the topics considered are the aesthetic experience, the relation between morality and art, ugliness in art and truth in art. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-304 
Philosophy of Law
An introduction to philosophical analysis centering on the nature, extent and justification of
law, the nature of legal thought, and the problems and theories of justice and the relationship
between law, ethics and morality. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-305 
Philosophy of Peace
An introduction to some of the philosophical dimensions of the search for world peace, including the elements that would constitute a just and lasting peace, nations as moral entities, justice
and national self-interest, force and violence, the morality of the use of force, peace-making
and peace-keeping groups. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

124	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHIL-307 
Philosophy of Technology
Technology is a ubiquitous and defining force in our world. This course investigates how our
conceptions of technology have emerged within philosophy, as well as the role technology
plays in shaping how we live and how we reflect upon questions of meaning and value in life.
Technological modes of understanding, organizing and transforming the world shape our relationships with others, with ourselves and with nature at fundamental levels. We will explore
how these modes have emerged and why they emerged so predominantly within a Western
social and intellectual context. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-308 
Environmental Philosophy
A variety of decision procedures may be and have been used to determine what to do regarding
various environmental issues. We might make the choice that has the least worst alternatives,
or the best alternatives, or is approved by the majority of those who vote or of those who are
affected, etc. Each alternative can determine what is reasonable and moral, and assessing them
presents theoretical problems. We examine each in terms of morality, examine their presuppositions and consequences, determine whether we can assess them, and if so, how. Students
begin to learn to be conscious of and assess the decision procedures that are often buried in
policy recommendations regarding particular environmental problems. Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-309 
Feminist Theory
This course examines the main currents in contemporary feminist thought. Feminist theory
explores the nature and effects of categories of sex and gender upon our ways of living, thinking
and doing, while also challenging how gendered assumptions might shape our conceptions of
identity and inquiry more generally. Different conceptions of sex and gender will be discussed,
and the course will investigate how these concepts affect our lives in both concrete and symbolic
ways. Special attention will be paid to how gendered assumptions color our understanding of
knowledge production, experiences of embodiment and emotion, public and private activities, and the nature of ethical decision making. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-310 
Theories of Knowledge
Epistemology, or the theory of knowledge, examines how we come to know what we know.
This course covers historical and contemporary approaches to the question of what knowledge is, what makes a belief true, and how beliefs are justified. Philosophical skepticism, the
idea that we actually know nothing at all, will also be discussed, as well as possible responses.
Other topics may include epistemic relativism, feminist epistemology, naturalism, the internalism/externalism debate, and the application of epistemology to other fields. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-311 
East Asian Philosophy
This course is an introduction to the origin and development of the philosophical traditions of
primarily China and Japan through a consideration of selected thinkers, schools, and classic
texts of Daoism, Confucianism, Buddhism, and Zen. Questions of metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics are emphasized with reference to the nature of reality and the person, social
harmony and self-realization, causality, right action, and enlightenment. Comparisons may
also be made with Western philosophers, both contemporary and classical. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-312 
American Philosophy
This course examines the contributions of American philosophers from the colonial era to the
present day. From the New England Transcendentalists of the 19th century, to the Pragmatism
and Neo-Pragmatism of the 20th and 21st, American philosophy has responded to the demands
of a pluralistic, ever-changing society. Because American philosophy is a reflection of American
culture, it has also offered a unique perspective on perennial philosophical problems in ways
that have differed sharply from dominant forms of European philosophy. Authors may include
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, Frederick Douglass, Susan B. Anthony, C.S.
Peirce, Jane Addams, William James, John Dewey, Richard Rorty, and Cornel West. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-313 
Philosophy of Film
Introduces students to models of film interpretation and critique that arose in pre-war Europe
and that have burgeoned since; these models combine philosophical, aesthetic, economic and
psychoanalytic methods of analysis. Among the topics considered are the nature of the image,
ideology and alienation, trauma, fetishism, magical realism, realism and anti-realism in film.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-314 
Philosophy of Vision and Imaging
This course examines how philosophers and others have understood the nature and primacy of
sight. It explores how technologies of seeing and imaging have influenced theories of sight and
our most dominant and authoritative practices of seeing and representing in the humanities
and the arts, as well as in the natural and social sciences. The course will focus on the impact
these theories and practices of seeing and representing both analogue and digital have on the
nature of knowing, as well as on how they shape and mediate our experiences of personal
and social identity and agency more generally. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Liberal Arts

PHIL-401 
Great Thinkers
An examination of the thought of some of those philosophers who have been most influential in the history of ideas. An attempt is made to cover in some depth the works of one or
more of these great thinkers. The student will begin to recognize the enduring nature of some
of our most pressing problems, as well as the intellectual foundation of proposed solutions.
(Prerequisite: one course in philosophy, or permission of instructor) Class 3, Credit 3 (varies) (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in philosophy is required.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-402 
Philosophy of Science
An examination of the nature of the scientific enterprise; possible discussion topics include
the presuppositions of science, its logic, its claims to reliability, and its relationships to society
and to problems of human values. (Prerequisites: Completion of one (1) course in philosophy
(at the 200 level or higher) or a major in the College of Science or College of Health Science &
Technology or PSYC-BS.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-403 
Social and Political Philosophy
An examination of some of the main problems of social and political philosophy through an
analysis, comparison and critical examination of various views concerning the natures of individuality and society and the relations between them. (Prerequisites: Completion of one (1)
course in any of the following disciplines: PHIL, POLS, SOCI, or CRIM.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-404 
Philosophy of Mind
The Philosophy of Mind includes issues of metaphysics, epistemology, logic, psychology, aesthetics, linguistics, cognitive science, artificial intelligence, and biology, to name a few. Issues
to be investigated include: Is there an ontological difference between minds and bodies? Could
there be minds without bodies? Can I know that I have a mind? Are there other minds in the
universe? Can I be conscious of my own consciousness? Can other things have the kinds of
experiences which I have? (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in philosophy is required.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-405 
Philosophy of the Social Sciences
This course examines the methods, foundations, assumptions and purposes of the social sciences. In particular, it will examine the ways in which science and non-science are distinguished
as well as the similarities and differences between the social and natural sciences. Special
attention will be paid to the ways in which both Anglo-American and European philosophical
traditions approach the social sciences. Other topics may include the role of values in social
scientific inquiry, the processes of explanation and theory confirmation in the social sciences, and various conceptions of interpretation and meaning in the social sciences. The course
will also examine how the tensions between claims of universality and claims of relativism,
claims of objectivity and claims of partiality should be understood within the social sciences.
(Prerequisites: Completion of one (1) prior course in philosophy (at the 200 or 300 level) or
a major in CRIM-BS, PSYC-BS, INGS-BS, SOCANT-BS, POLS-BS, ECON-BS, or PUBL-BS.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-406 
Contemporary Philosophy
This course examines developments in philosophy since 1900. During this time philosophy
evolved along with science, politics, and the arts. In some cases philosophy responded to new
discoveries and theories while at other times it precipitated movements that had far-reaching effects. A range of philosophical approaches may be discussed, including existentialism,
experimental philosophy, feminist theory, hermeneutics, logical positivism, neo-pragmatism,
phenomenology, and postmodernism. The connections among different approaches may also
be addressed. (Prerequisites: Must have completed at least one PHIL course - 200 level or higher.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-407 
Philosophy of Action
This course explores the three central philosophical issues of action theory: what is an action,
what is an agent, and what is metaphysical freedom. The first part of the course examines the
most significant theories of action and the different ways in which they characterize intentional
behavior. The second part of this course explores the nature of agency. The third part of this
course focuses on the classical problem of free will. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course
in philosophy is required.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-408 
Critical Social Theory
Introduces students to models of cultural critique that arose in pre-war Germany and that have
burgeoned in our contemporary aesthetic and philosophical practices. These models combine
philosophical, aesthetic, economic and psychoanalytic methods of analysis. Among the topics
considered are alienation and reification, hegemony or false consciousness, trauma, fetishism,
the authoritarian personality and state, advertising and modern technology, and the relative
autonomy of art. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in philosophy is required.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

PHIL-409 Existentialism
Existentialism is distinguished by its emphasis on human existence and the way its meaning is
created through actions and choices. Existentialism focuses on the concept of individual freedom in an effort to respond authentically to the possibilities which life presents, emphasizing
the importance of certain psychological states (e.g., anxiety, anticipation of death, fear, care,
responsibility, and hope) and extreme situations in bringing us to an awareness of our radical
freedom. This course will consider such philosophers and writers as Dostoevski, Kierkegaard,
Nietzsche, Berdyaev, Heidegger, Jaspers, Camus, Sartre, Kafka, Beauvoir, Marcel, Buber, Ortega,
and Unamuno. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in philosophy is required.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-411 Metaphysics
Metaphysics is the study of the general features of existence or reality. This course focuses
on the fundamental concepts of being as developed in several major philosophers from the
Greeks to the present. Discussion will focus on such topics as God, time, space, substance,
essence, existence, process, causality, possibility, necessity, chance, and value. (Prerequisites:
Must have completed at least one PHIL course - 200 level or higher.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
PHIL-412 
Nineteenth Century Philosophy
The nineteenth century marks a radical shift in the history of philosophy and culture and stands
in its own right as a distinct period of thought between the modern era and the contemporary
era. This course will consider such philosophical positions as idealism, empiricism, existentialistic romanticism, Marxism, evolution, nihilism, positivism, pragmatism, and the role of the
arts and aesthetics. Philosophers considered include Schelling, Fichte, Hegel, Schopenhauer,
Mill, Marx, Darwin, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Comte, Bradley, Green, Peirce, and James.
(Prerequisites: Must have completed at least one PHIL course - 200 level or higher.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-413 
Philosophy and Literary Theory
Introduces students to models of literary theory from the mid-twentieth century to the present and familiarizes them with the key works of literature to be analyzed. Prepares students
to practice questioning and critiquing texts using the philosophical, aesthetic, economic and
psychoanalytic methods of analysis which have come to form the foundation of contemporary
literary theory. Among the topics considered are culture and imperialism, performativity, the
encounter of modern literature and modern technology, structuralism and semiotics, the role
of psychoanalysis, the role of the academy, and the relative autonomy of art. (Prerequisites:
Completion of one course in philosophy is required.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
PHIL-414 
Philosophy of Language
This course examines how philosophers and others have understood the nature of language.
It explores the classical philosophical contexts in metaphysics, epistemology, aesthetics and
rhetoric in which concerns about the nature of language arose. In addition, the course focuses
on recent debates, within both contemporary analytic and continental traditions of philosophy.
Some likely areas of inquiry will be: theories of reference, description and naming; theories of
meaning, metaphor and narrative; functionalist, pragmatist and naturalist accounts; structuralist, post-structuralist, and hermeneutic accounts, among others. The prominence of one or
the other of these debates and approaches will vary. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course
in philosophy is required.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-415 
Ethical Theory
This course examines the theoretical basis of ethics and morality, namely the theoretical commitments that enter into any judgment that a particular action is right or wrong. Possible topics
may include: different ways of understanding the concepts of right and wrong; the existence
or non-existence of moral facts; different criteria of moral actions; different conceptions of
the good life. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in philosophy is required.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-416 
Seminar in Philosophy
Examines some area of philosophy at an advanced undergraduate level. The area examined
may vary from semester to semester. The seminar is designed especially for those whose interest in philosophy goes beyond the requirements of the Liberal Arts curriculum. (Prerequisites:
Completion of two (2) courses in philosophy is required.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
PHIL-449 
Special Topics
A critical examination of issues in some area of philosophy not covered in other philosophy
courses. (Prerequisites: Completion of one course in philosophy is required.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL-499 
Philosophy Co-op
One semester of work experience in a professional setting related to the philosophy major.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

125

College of Liberal Arts

PHIL-571 
Honors Philosophy
A critical examination of issues in some area of philosophy, but especially geared for honors
students and others who wish to participate in an honors section. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
PHIL-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an
independent study are provided in the College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent Study,
Credits 1 - 9 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Political Science
POLS-110 
American Politics
This course examines the basic principles, themes and institutions of American politics. The
course will approach the study of American politics from four interrelated topics: 1) American
political values and constitutional foundations; 2) mass politics and political socialization; 3)
political institutions; and 4) public policy. Current events will be discussed throughout the
course in an effort to promote responsible citizenship. In addition to providing a basic overview
of American politics, this course seeks to develop critical thinking, group dynamic and communication skills that are transferrable outside the classroom. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
POLS-110H 
Honors Political Science
This course explores the founding principles of the American political order and their contemporary relevance. In addition, the course will examine the extent to which the three political
institutions of American government (legislature, executive, and judiciary) have either adhered
to or departed from the founding principles. Emphasis will be placed upon reading and analyzing primary sources from the founding era and some of the more influential perspectives on
American government drawn from the Civil War period to the twentieth century. (Prerequisites:
POLS-110 or POLS-110H or POLS-120 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-115 
Ethical Debates Amer Politics
This course examines past and contemporary political and ethical debates that have shaped,
clarified and transformed the meaning of the foundations of the American democratic-republic.
At every turn, political and ethical debates in American politics have focused on the meaning
of the principles of equality and consent and the moral implications of individual rights. The
course will address topics such as the moral foundations of the Founding, the moral character
of the Union, the injustice of slavery in a regime dedicated to the principle of equality, justice
and the Civil Rights movement, and the progressive critique of the Founding, the rise of the
entitlement state and its critiques, as well as current political and ethical controversies. Special
attention will be paid to the political speeches of those directly involved in the debates. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS-120 
Introduction to International Relations
The purpose of this course is to provide a basic knowledge of the field of international relations.
Among the topics to be addressed are key theoretical concepts, themes and controversies in
the field such as: important state and non-state actors in international politics, security, economic relations between states, levels of analysis, and schools of thought. Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
POLS-200 
Law and Society
This course focuses on the relationships between law and other social institutions, and examines
the values and interests that are expressed in law and shaped by legal structures and processes.
This course takes an explicit interdisciplinary approach to understanding law and is designed
for those interested in a critical inquiry of the nature of law within a framework of a broad liberal arts education. Class 3, Credit 3 (F) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-205 
Ethics in International Politics
This course examines the role of ethics in international politics. It will address topics such as
humanitarian intervention, just war, the ethics of immigration, international economic justice,
accountability in international development aid, and the ethical role of international organizations and non-state actors. Special attention will be given to thinkers who discuss the promise
and limits of ethics in international politics and who give an account of the force of international law in establishing ethical norms throughout international political history. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS-210 
Comparative Politics
The course provides a mode of analysis for the study of political systems. Basic concepts of
political science are utilized to present a descriptive and analytical examination of various
political systems that can be classified as liberal democracies, post-communist, newly industrializing countries, and Third World. Particular attention is paid to the governmental structure,
current leadership and major issues of public policy of those selected political systems under
review. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

126	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

POLS-215 
Tech, Ethics and Global Politics
This course examines the mutual influence of science, technology and global politics within
the framework of international ethics. Contemporary debates around drones, climate change,
cyber security, the Ebola pandemic, hydraulic fracturing, renewable energy, nanotechnology,
biotechnology, and nuclear power reveal the field of International Relations must take scientific
and technological developments more seriously. In order to comprehend the mutual influence
of science, technology, and global politics, the course will examine the political project of the
early moderns, who sought the removal of traditional, moral restraints on scientific and technological innovations, as well as the international efforts to regulate scientific and technological
innovation beginning in the twentieth century and continuing to the present day. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS-220 
Global Political Economy
Examines the interplay between states and markets, and the interaction of the global economy and international politics. The course will cover political economy, political ideology,
global trade, international capital investment, debt, the integration of national financial markets, and the impact of globalization on the human condition and the environment. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-250 
State and Local Politics
This course is a study of politics and government on the state and local levels, as well as the
relationships between these levels and the federal government. The first focus of the course
is on the federal system of government, including the interdependence of the three levels of
government. The course continues by examining the state level followed by a focus on local
government. A final topic is policy-making, including revenues and expenditures, which again
illustrate the interrelationship of the three levels. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-285 
Environmental Ethics and Political Ecology
This course examines environmental issues through a variety of political and ethical perspectives. The goal of the course is to understand how the meaning of political and ethical concepts
(e.g., citizenship, justice, responsibility, security, sovereignty) have been broadened or reinterpreted in light of the ascendancy of environmentalism. For instance, the course will cover
questions concerning whether environmentalism has encouraged a more precautionary sort of
politics, especially in regard to agricultural biotechnology, along with how it has transformed
the traditional military definition of security to include new notions such as climate or food
security. To address these questions and issues, the course fosters an appreciation of the ethical reasoning of the interdisciplinary field known as “political ecology.” An emphasis on the
ethical reasoning of political ecology will facilitate a more comprehensive understanding of
environmental issues through unraveling the political forces at work in environmental change
at both the global and local levels. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
POLS-290 
Politics and the Life Sciences
This course examines the intersection between politics and the life sciences. The course will
examine the biological approach to human behavior, paying special attention to the implications of biological explanations of behavior for political systems. Topics to be covered may
include the biological approach to morality, law, and international conflict, as well as the
political and policy implications of new research in the biological sciences including biotechnology. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-295 Cyberpolitics
Innovations in digital communication technologies have the potential to affect many aspects
of politics and government. Beyond specific elements such as elections and delivery of government services, these developments have the potential to expand and redefine the nature of
political participation and civic engagement, and to alter the structure of political power. This
course examines the potential and promise of digital democracy, and attempts to separate hype
from reality. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-300 
Rhetoric and Political Deliberation
Often political deliberation requires reasoning about indeterminate subjects of public import,
which do not permit us to arrive at incontestable conclusions. Even where there is compelling
evidence the conclusions of political deliberation usually require rhetorical assistance and arguments. Rhetoric reflects an appreciation that the simple truth and scientific facts do not suffice
in all circumstances, that citizens sometimes have to be persuaded and led through persuasive
speeches and arguments to reach reasonable decisions in public life. This course examines the
role of rhetoric in political deliberation through a consideration of some of the most politically
important speeches in American and international politics. The course will also consider the
political use of rhetorical devices as well as the differences between deliberative, epideictic and
forensic rhetoric. As a writing intensive course, students will practice the writing conventions
associated with the discipline and their skills in editing, revising, and reviewing their writing
and the writing of their peers. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Liberal Arts

POLS-305 
Political Parties and Voting
Political parties are a crucial part of the democratic process, as are elections. Parties and elections serve as a critical link between citizens and their government, as parties and candidates
promote policies favored by voters. This course studies parties, their history, their future and
their role in the democratic process. Overall emphasis is on the degree to which parties perform or fail to perform as a link between citizens and government. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-310 
The Congress
This course examines the role of the Congress in American government. Topics studied include
elections, party organization, committees, interest-group activities and executive-legislative
relations. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-315 
The Presidency
A study of the role of the presidency in the American political system. Among the topics considered are the nomination and election processes, the evolution, expansion and limitation of
presidential power, factors in decision-making and the various leadership functions performed
by the president. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-320 
American Foreign Policy
A study of the formulation and execution of American foreign policy, including the examination of the instruments, procedures, and philosophies shaping the development of foreign
policy. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-325 
International Law and Organizations
The study of international law and organizations is the study of international cooperation and
governance. The course will cover a variety of theoretical and substantive topics including the
theories of international law and organizations, the historical development of international organizations, how these organizations work in practice, and whether they are effective.
Emphasis will be placed on the United Nations and the role and usefulness of nongovernmental organizations in international organization. Several of the substantive issues discussed are
interstate violence and attempts to address humanitarian concerns, globalizations, and the
environment. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-330 
Human Rights in Global Perspective
This course explores the theoretical meaning, both domestically and internationally, and the
institutional and political aspects of human rights. Issues covered include the definition of
human rights; the relationship between civil and political rights and economic, social and
cultural rights; the meaning and impact of humanitarian and international human rights law;
the impact of cultural relativism in the definition and assessment of the promotion and protection of human rights; the significance of different religious perspectives; the question of
the legitimacy of humanitarian interventions and the effects of globalization on human rights
perceptions and practices. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-333 
The Rhetoric of Terrorism
This class examines the history of terrorism (both the concept and the term), definitions of
terrorism and attempts to explain the "root causes" of terrorism through rhetorical and ethical analysis of narratives written by historians, journalists, and terrorists themselves. Students
will read and discuss charters, manifestoes and messages ("terrorism texts") of domestic and
foreign, regional and global, non-state entities motivated by politics or religion to commit
violence, as well as the efforts of analysts to explain and contextualize their activities. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-335 
Politics in Developing Countries
This course explores the ways in which the historical, cultural, economic and political contexts of societies of Africa, Asia and Latin America determines the patterns of their political
processes. Focus is directed to such factors as history, religion, economic underdevelopment,
and culture and their impact on the efforts to promote liberalization and democratization, economic and social modernization, and political and social stability. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-345 
Politics and Public Policy
A study of the politics of the policy process covering these basic questions: How do public problems get to the agenda of government? How does government formulate policy alternatives?
How does government legitimate public policy? How does government implement public policy? How does government evaluate public policy? Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-350 
Politics of East Asia
This course examines the East-Asian countries using the following comparative criteria as the
organizing guidelines: modern political history of the country, political economy and development, governance and policy making, representation and participation, as well as major
domestic and foreign policy issues. The political prospects of the countries for the 21st century
will be analyzed and discussed. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

POLS-355 
Political Leadership
The fundamental proposition of this course is that political leadership makes a crucial difference in the life of a nation. The course will examine how leadership may serve as either a
constructive or destructive force in the pursuit of some shared, national goal or purpose. The
course will consider a diverse range of leaders and their respective styles and types of leadership. Each leader will be studied in terms of his or her historical context, the means and ends
each employed in the pursuit of political goals, and the particular qualities both virtues and
vices each embodied as a political leader. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-360 
International Political Thought
The course provides a general overview of international themes, ethical principles, and issues
that are taken into consideration in international political thought. Possible topics may include
theoretical analyses of the ideas of sovereignty, nationalism, hegemony, imperialism, global
civil society, political theology, balance of power, collective security, just war, perpetual peace,
and human rights. Guiding themes of the course will be a reflection upon the nature of political
legitimacy in the international context and the tension between political justifications based
upon necessity and those based upon justice. In reading the major political thinkers students
will be encouraged to reflect upon the challenge of reconciling ethical obligations to one’s own
community with those of humanity in general. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
POLS-410 
Evolutionary International Relations
This course examines the biological explanations of international conflict. Topics will include
the evolutionary approach to human behavior, international conflict, and the relevance for evolutionary explanations as an alternative or supplement to current paradigms of international
relations like realism and rational choice. Finally, the course will look at what an evolutionary
understanding of politics means for peace-keeping missions, global governance, and the stability of international cooperation. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-415 
Evolution and the Law
This course examines the evolutionary approach to law. The course will consider the relevance of evolutionary theory to the analysis of law, the roots of rule of law, the relationship
between natural law and common law, as well as the strengths and limitations of the evolutionary approach to specific themes within law, such as property law and family law. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-420 
Primate Politics
This course examines the biological approach to the study of political order. Students will learn
about the basic political structures of the great apes, how they differ, and how an understanding
of these primate social structures can help us understand human political behavior. Specific
topics might include the biological explanations of patriarchy and matriarchy, the biology
of dominance structures, and the biology of leadership choice. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-425 
Constitutional Law
A study of the Constitution of 1787 and the manner in which it was written. The focus of the
course is on the way the people have, through the Constitution, delegated powers and responsibilities of government to the Congress, the President, the Courts and the States. Selected
Supreme Court opinions will be considered to shed light on how the Constitution has been
read and how thoughtful citizens might read it. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-435 
American Political Thought
Provides a general overview of the political ideas, concepts, issues and principles which taken
together compose the stream of American political thought. Examines major controversies,
which have marked the developing body of the literature by examining the contributions of
major political thinkers. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-440 
War and the State
Explores the enduring reality of war through an analysis of regional and global conflicts since
the establishment of the modern international system. Key concepts include deterrence,
appeasement, offensive-defensive military strategies, and international balances of power.
These will be applied to several historical cases to explain why wars occur and how they might
be avoided. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-445 
Terrorism and Political Violence
This course examines the causes, methods, and responses of non-state groups attempting to
establish new political orders. The combined use of violence with the tactic of terror distinguishes these groups from others seeking political change. Special attention will be given to
national and international efforts attempting to resolve such conflicts. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

127

College of Liberal Arts

POLS-455 
Comparative Public Policy
Modernization theorists predict, industrial and post-industrial societies tend to face similar
public policy issues in such areas as public education, health care, public transportation, public
housing and the environment. However, the political responses to these challenges have varied
in significant ways in different countries. Many states have developed extensive welfare state
systems, while some have put more emphasis on market-based solutions. The course seeks to
explore and analyze the factors that explain these differences and assess the extent to which
the different approaches succeed in meeting these policy challenges. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-460 
Classical Constitutionalism, Virtue and Law
This course will examine the classical quest for personal and political order. It will concentrate
on the foundations of classical political science and its search for the best regime. The course
will also examine the classical understanding of constitutionalism, or the regime as the form
for encouraging virtue through the rule of law, in contrast to the modern view that attempts
to combine liberty and property. Along the way, the enduring questions of cosmology, human
nature, justice and the good will be examined. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-465 
Modern Constitutionalism, Liberty and Equality
This course examines the founding principles of modern constitutionalism and the modern
state. Special attention will be paid to the theory and practice of the principles of equality, liberty, and consent. A major effort throughout the course will be made to consider the assessments
and prescriptions for modern constitutionalism offered by American and continental political
thinkers. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-485 
Politics Through Fiction
This course explores contemporary issues facing the American and global political order
through the lens of fiction. Particular attention will be paid to the grounds of sound political deliberation, the limitations of prudence and the theory and practice of American political
principles both home and abroad. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-490 
Politics Through Film
This course explores the enduring issues facing the American and global political order through
the lens of film. Particular attention will be paid to the principles of sound political deliberation, the limitations of political leadership and the theory and practice of American political
principles both at home and abroad. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
POLS-525 
Special Topics in Political Science
Special topics will examine a political theme, issue or problem at an advanced undergraduate
level. The subject matter examined will vary from year to year according to the availability of
faculty and the interests of students. The course is designed especially for those whose interest in politics goes beyond the requirements of the Liberal Arts curriculum. (Class 3, Credit 3
(varies) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
POLS-530 
Political Science Capstone
This seminar provides an opprtunity to study in-depth any theme, problem or work within the
discipline of political science, for example the foundations of self-government, foreign policy,
international law and organizations, and the fundamental problems of international relations.
Course content will be determined in consultation with the instructor. Teams of students will
write a substantial paper on a topic related to the general themes of the seminar. (POLS-BS &
3rd or 4th year) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Psychology
PSYC-101 
Introduction to Psychology
Introduction to the field of psychology. Provides a survey of basic concepts, theories, and
research methods. Topics include: thinking critically with psychological science; neuroscience
and behavior; sensation and perception; learning; memory; thinking, language, and intelligence; motivation and emotion; personality; psychological disorders and therapy; and social
psychology. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-101H 
Honors Introduction to Psychology
A state-of-the-art survey of major subfields in psychology and the scientific study of behavior
and mental processes. Topics include: a critical evaluation of psychological science; neuroscience and behavior; sensation and perception; learning; memory; thinking, language, and
intelligence; motivation and emotion; personality; psychological disorders and therapy; and
social psychology. The course focuses not only upon understanding the behavior of the individual, but also upon understanding how the individual acts within groups and reacts to group
membership. Besides textbook reading, students will read and discuss current publications on
the topics we explore, including examination of the scientific method (including validity and
reliability) employed in published studies. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

128	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PSYC-221 
Abnormal Psychology
This course will serve as an introduction to the study of psychopathology and mental illness.
The course examines the major categories of mental disorder not only from the descriptive
point of view, but also in terms of the major theoretical explanations of the causes of disorder.
The major treatment modalities also are covered. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or
equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-222 Biopsychology
Introduction to the field of behavioral neuroscience, the study of neurobiological basis of cognition and behavior. Topics include neuroanatomy and physiology, localization of function,
brain injury, research methods in behavioral neuroscience, and biological basis of language,
memory, emotion, conscious states, and sexual behavior, with an evolutionary perspective.
(Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)
PSYC-223 
Cognitive Psychology
This course examines how people perceive, learn, represent, remember and use information.
Contemporary theory and research are surveyed in such areas as attention, pattern and object
recognition, memory, knowledge representation, language acquisition and use, reasoning,
decision making, problem solving, creativity, and intelligence. Applications in artificial intelligence and human/technology interaction may also be considered. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101
or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-224 Perception
This course covers perception in all of the sensory modalities (vision, hearing, taste, smell,
touch). We will trace what happens to the physical stimulus as our sensory systems analyze it
to produce complicated perceptions of the world around us. We will explore the fact that many
complex perceptual phenomena draw upon explanations at the physiological, psychological,
and cognitive levels. Topics on sensory perception in non-human animals may also be covered.
This is a required course for psychology majors in the visual perception track. (Prerequisites:
PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-225 
Social Psychology
This course explores topics related to behaviors and mental processes of individuals in social
situations. Topics include: methodology, social perception, social cognition, the self, attitudes,
prejudice, attraction, social influence, pro-social behavior, aggression, and behavior in groups.
Course activities include lecture, class demonstrations, and assignments. (Prerequisites: PSYC101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-231 
Death and Dying
This course examines the role of loss including death in our lives and the way we give and receive
support during difficult times. It also looks at how society enfranchises some grievers and disenfranchises others. Included in this course is an examination of our options as consumers of
funeral and burial services, grief counseling and other products and services which can either
minimize or abate our grief. Central to the course is an examination of the ethical principles
which apply to abortion, euthanasia and suicide and an examination of the ways in which the
choices we make may be structured to express our core values. Finally, the course explores how
The American way of Death differs from that of other societies and how we might incorporate
the wisdom of other cultures into our own practices. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-232 
Developmental Psychology
This course explores the process of human development, from conception through adolescence
and continuing through later adulthood. The developmental approach integrates across many
areas of psychology, including perception, cognition, social and emotional development, personality, morality, human factors, and neuroscience. Topics will include such things as infant
brain plasticity, the development of identity in adolescence, and memory changes in adulthood. In addition, experimental methods of developmental research will be introduced and
practiced, including issues specific to studying children and adults. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101
or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-233 
History and Systems in Psychology
This course explores the history of psychology from ancient to modern times and examines
topical and philosophical questions that have persisted. Psychological schools of thought
to be covered include pre-modern philosophical influences, Structuralism, Functionalism,
Behaviorism, Psychoanalysis, Humanistic Psychology, Cognitive Psychology, Psychological
Testing, and Positive Psychology. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent
course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-233H 
Honors History and Systems
This honors course explores the history of psychology from ancient to modern times and examines topical and philosophical questions that have persisted. Psychological schools of thought
to be covered include pre-modern philosophical influences, Structuralism, Functionalism,
Behaviorism, Psychoanalysis, Humanistic Psychology, Cognitive Psychology, Psychological
Testing, and Positive Psychology. (Honors Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

PSYC-234 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology
Industrial and organizational (I/O) psychology is a branch of applied psychology that is concerned with efficient management of an industrial labor force and especially with problems
encountered by workers in a mechanized environment. Specific areas include job analysis,
defining and measuring job performance, performance appraisal, tests, employment interviews,
employee selection and training, and human factors. This course covers the basic principles of
the above areas as well as applications of current research in I/O psychology. (Prerequisites:
PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-235 
Learning and Behavior
This course covers topics in learning such as non-associative learning, classical conditioning,
instrumental conditioning, stimulus control of behavior, reinforcement, generalization and
discrimination, and observational learning. Topics on learning and behavior in non-human
animals may also be covered. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-236 Personality
This course is intended for students who are interested in learning the history and current
status of personality theories. Students will learn the strengths and weaknesses of the major
personality theories, as well as how to assess, research and apply these theories. As much as
possible, application to real life situations will be discussed. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC101H or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-237 
Psychology of Gender
The purpose of this course is to examine the psychology and lives of girls and women. In addition to the influence of culture, biological and genetic differences will be highlighted for each
of the different topics. The topics covered include gender stereotypes, the development of gender roles, gender comparisons, love relationships, sexuality, motherhood and violence against
women. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101 or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-238 
Psychology of Religion
This course examines (primarily social) psychological approaches to religious and spiritual
belief, behavior, and experience. Topics include psychological approaches to religion, religious development in children and adolescents, religious development in adults and old age,
religious conversion, religious orientation, religious attitudes and behaviors, religion and wellbeing, group dynamics in religious communities, religion as a “total institution” — cults and
deprogramming, need theories and religion, and religion and politics. Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-239 
Positive Psychology
This course will provide a survey of the emerging field of Positive Psychology. Topics covered
will include defining and assessing “the good life”; the relationships between life satisfaction
and personal factors such as wealth, education, and longevity; cross-cultural perspectives; virtues and strengths; and biological factors (i.e., genetics and neurological correlates). The focus
will be on contemporary empirical psychology literature, though the course will also draw on
literature from historical, philosophical, and economic disciplines. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101
or PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-250 
Research Methods I
This course will serve as an introduction to research methods in psychology, with the goal of
understanding research design, analysis and writing. Topics include examining the variety of
methods used in psychology research, understanding research eth-ics, developing empirical
hypotheses, designing experiments, understanding statistical concepts, interpreting results,
and writing research and review papers in APA style. This is a required course for all psychology majors, and is restricted to students in the psychology program. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101
or PSYC-101H and STAT-145 or STAT-145H equivalent course and student standing in the
PSYC-BS program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-251 
Research Methods II
This course will serve as an advanced research methods course in psychology, and will build on
the foundational knowledge presented in Research Methods I. Topics and tasks for this course
include designing single and multi-factor experiments, interpreting correlational research,
completing statistical analyses appropriate to design, completing and analyzing an IRB application, understanding observational and survey research, and presenting results in APA style.
This is a required course for all psychology majors, and is restricted to students in the psychology program. (Prerequisites: PSYC-250 and STAT-146 or equivalent course.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

PSYC-310 Psychophysiology
This course is intended for students in the biopsychology track. This course provides a
comprehensive introduction to psycho-physiology. Students will learn about various psychophysiological measures and their use in the study of areas such as attention, emotion, and
language. Topics may include mind-body interaction, somatic and autonomic nervous system
function, central and peripheral physiological measures (e.g., EEG, EMG, cardiac reactivity,
skin conductance responses), psychophysiological research methods, and applied psychophysiology. Students will be expected to be able to write at an upper level using APA format. Part
of the biopsychology track for the psychology degree program. (Prerequisites: (PSYC-221 or
PSYC-222 or 0514-548 or 0514-554) and (PSYC-251 or (0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or
equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-311 Psychopharmacology
This course is intended for students in the biopsychology track. A comprehensive introduction to psychoactive drugs. Topics include pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, synaptic
transmission, drugs of abuse and drugs used in the treatment of mental disorders, and the
behavioral and cognitive effects of these drugs. Students will be expected to be able to write at
an upper level using APA format. (Prerequisites: (PSYC-221 or PSYC-222 or 0514-548 or 0514554) and (PSYC-251 or (0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-312 
Biological Bases of Mental Disorders
This course is intended for students in the biopsychology track. This course covers the biological underpinnings of psychiatric mental disorders such as anxiety disorders, mood disorders,
psychotic disorders, and developmental disorders. Topics will include neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, genetics and biologically based treatments of mental disorders. Students will learn
about biologically based research methods used to study mental disorders and to think critically
about research findings in the field. Students will be expected to be able to write at an upper
level using APA format. (Prerequisites: (PSYC-222 or 0514-553 or 0514-554) and (PSYC-251
or (0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-320 
Clinical Psychology
This course is intended for students in the clinical track. This course is designed to provide a
broad overview of the field of clinical psychology, including the way in which it is similar to
and different from other mental health disciplines (psychiatry, social work, school psychology). The course will cover the basic foundations of clinical psychology, training models and
graduate programs, clinical assessment, clinical interventions, and subspecialties in clinical
psychology (e.g., neuropsychology, child clinical). (Prerequisites: PSYC-221 and (PSYC-250 or
0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses and student standing in the PSYC-BS
program.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-321 
Psychological Testing
This course is intended for students in the clinical track. This course is intended for students in
the psychology major to develop knowledge of psychological testing theory, methods, and applications. Students will first learn about the history of psychological testing, types of tests, and
uses of tests. Students will learn about test development and standardization procedures including item construction, sampling, norms, reliability, validity, administration procedures, and
scoring. A brief review of relevant statistical concepts will be provided. Students will learn how
to locate and evaluate available psychological tests. Examples of psychological tests from various
areas of application will be reviewed and critiqued. (Prerequisites: PSYC-221 and (PSYC-250
or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-322 Psychotherapy
This course is intended for students in the clinical track. Students will learn the strengths and
weaknesses of the major therapeutic approaches. They will learn the efficacy of these approaches. They will learn the theoretical and research bases for the approaches. As much as possible,
application to real life situations will be discussed. Part of the clinical track for the psychology
degree program. (Prerequisites: PSYC-221 and (PSYC-250 or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-330 
Memory and Attention
This course is intended for students in the cognitive track. This course reviews current research
in the areas of memory and attention. This course will consider such memory topics as: classic
theories of memory, Baddeley’s model of working memory, in-formation processing, implicit
and explicit memory, principles of forgetting, developmental changes in memory, skill memory, autobiographical memory, eyewitness memory, and the neural bases of memory. Attention
topics covered in this course will include: Selective and divided attention, search and vigilance,
signal detection theory, and neural correlates of attention. (Prerequisites: PSYC-223 and (PSYC251 or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

129

College of Liberal Arts

PSYC-331 
Language and Thought
This course is intended for students in the cognitive track. This course examines the structure of human language and its relationship to thought, and surveys contemporary theory and
research on the comprehension and production of spoken and written language. In addition, we
will discuss categorization, representation of knowledge, expertise, consciousness, intelligence,
and artificial intelligence. Topics on language and thought in non-human animals may also be
covered. Part of the cognitive track for the psychology degree program. (Prerequisites: PSYC223 and (PSYC-251 or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-332 
Decision Making, Judgment, and Problem Solving
This course is intended for students in the cognitive track. This course explores judgment, decision-making and problem-solving processes and focuses on the social and cognitive aspects of
complex information processing. Major topics include normative, descriptive (heuristics and
biases), and naturalistic approaches to decision-making, as well as selective perception, memory and hindsight biases, framing effects, social influences, group processes and human error.
Models of decision-making considered include the prospect theory, expected utility theory, and
Bayes’ Theorem. Problem solving will be examined from perspectives of formal, computational
methods as well as intuition and creativity. Experimental methods and applications in design of
systems and decision aids will receive special attention. (Prerequisites: PSYC-223 and (PSYC251 or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-340 
Interpersonal Relationships
This course is intended for students in the social track. This course explores topics related to
interpersonal relationships including: methodology, communication in relationships, romantic
relationships, friendships, work relationships, as well as individual differences that can influence the development, maintenance, and cessation of relationships. Course activities include
lecture, class discussions, and assignments. (Prerequisites: PSYC-225 and (PSYC-251 or 0514315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-341 
Group Processes
This course is intended for students in the social track. This course explores social psychological
phenomena at the level of the group. It explores intragroup processes such as cohesion, norms,
network structure, social influence, task productivity, group decision making and polarization.
It also explores intergroup processes, especially those related to intergroup conflict and cooperation, such as social categorization, social identity, and stereotyping. (Prerequisites: PSYC-225
and (PSYC-251 or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits
3 (Biannual)
PSYC-342 
Attitudes and Social Cognition
This course is intended for students in the social track. This course explores social psychological phenomena at the level of the individual. This course addresses those domains of social
behavior in which cognition plays a major role, including the interface of cognition with overt
behavior, affect, and motivation. Among topics covered are the formation, change, and utilization of attitudes, attributions, and stereotypes, person memory, self-regulation, and the origins
and consequences of moods and emotions insofar as these interact with cognition. This course
also explores the influence of cognition on significant social phenomena such as persuasion,
communication, prejudice, social development, and cultural trends. Part of the social track for
the psychology degree program. (Prerequisites: PSYC-225 and (PSYC-251 or 0514-315, 0514350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-350 
Visual System and Psychophysics
This course is intended for students in the visual perception track. The course focuses on
visual perception and the methods used for studying sensation and perception. Structures in
the human and other visual systems will be examined along with neurophysiology relevant to
vision in particular and perception in general. Classical psychophysics, forced choice methods,
staircases and other specialized techniques will be examined. Students will collect and analyze
psychophysical data to demonstrate their understanding of the methods and their application in vision science. Part of the visual perception track for the psychology degree program.
(Prerequisites: PSYC-224 and (PSYC-250 or 0514-315, 0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-351 
Color, Form and Object Perception
This course is intended for students in the visual perception track. The course focuses on the
perception of the surface properties of objects, including color, form and other attributes. The
course will examine how information is encoded by the visual system, with an emphasis on
recognizing objects in scenes and surfaces. Receptive field properties, parallel processing in
vision, the binding problem and other issues in vision science will be presented and discussed.
The course requires students to read primary sources and to gain some experience with the
design of experiments. Empirical research in vision will be conducted including data collection
and analysis. Students are recommended to take PSYC-350 Visual System and Psychophysics
before this course, but it is not required. (Prerequisites: PSYC-224 and (PSYC-250 or 0514-315,
0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)

130	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PSYC-352 
Depth, Motion and Space Perception
This course is intended for students in the visual perception track. The course focuses on the
perception of the three-dimensional space, including the perception of depth and motion. This
course will examine how sensory data are used to produce an accurate representation of the
world. This course will include some discussion of multimodal perception given the interactions that occur between audition, touch, and vision to produce a 3D representation. Topics
will include receptive field properties in relevant areas of cortex, parallel processing in vision,
the uncertainty of extracting accurate 3D properties from 2D input and related material. The
course requires students to read primary sources and to gain some experience with the design
of experiments. Empirical research in vision will be conducted including data collection and
analysis. Students are recommended to take PSYC-350-Visual System and Psychophysics before
this course, but it is not required. (Prerequisites: PSYC-224 and (PSYC-250 or 0514-315, 0514350 and 0514-400) or equivalent courses.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
PSYC-401 
Senior Capstone Proposal
This course is intended for students in the psychology major to develop experimental research
expertise and put into practice some of what is learned in Research Methods I and II. Students
will explore topics of interest for further research in psychology. They will develop one research
idea that could either form the basis for a senior project in psychology or is a valid test of a
research idea. Students will be supervised by the course instructor as they develop a research
question, conduct a literature review, write the introduction, and examine questions about
control, validity and reliability. This course will culminate in a research proposal. Students
going on to Senior Project in Psychology can use this as a proposal course and must find their
faculty adviser for senior project before they finish this course. Students who are not planning
for Senior Project will practice writing a proposal and the related skills required to critically
examine an advanced topic in Psychology. (Prerequisites: PSYC-251 or (0514-315, 0514-350
and 0514-400) or equivalent course.Co-requisites: One (1) 300-level psychology (PSYC) class
or one (1) 500-level psychology (0514) class.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-444 
Honors Special Topics: Psychology
Focuses on contemporary issues and topics not covered in depth in other psychology courses.
Concentrates on student discussion of primary source readings on topics such as persuasion,
stereotypes, evolutionary psychology, forensic psychology, cognition, perception, clinical techniques, the neuron, drugs and behavior, rumor psychology, intelligence, sexuality, morality,
or health psychology. (Prerequisites: PSYC-101H or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
PSYC-498 
Psychology Internship
Internship in Psychology. This is for 350 hours of supervised unpaid work off campus with
non-profits, public service groups, the zoo, or similar organizations. Each Internship experience must be approved by the Department of Psychology prior to starting. (PSYC-BS) INT,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-499 
Psychology Co-op
Psychology Co-op (PSYC-BS) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC-502 
Seminar in Psychology
This course is intended for students in the psychology major to integrate material covered in
earlier courses and examine broad topics in Psychology. The specific topics covered will vary
from semester to semester. This course is an opportunity for faculty and students to examine issues that transcend sub-disciplines in Psychology. Students will read original research
and examine influential theories relevant to the topic. (Prerequisites: PSYC-251 or (0514-315,
0514-350 and 0514-400) or equivalent course.Co-requisites: One (1) 300-level psychology
(PSYC) class or one (1) 500-level psychology (0514) class.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-510 
Senior Project in Psychology
This course is intended for students in the psychology major to demonstrate experimental
research expertise, while being guided by faculty advisors. The topic to be studied is up to the
student, who must find a faculty advisor before signing up for the course. Students will be
supervised by the advisor as they conduct their literature review, develop the research question or hypothesis, develop the study methodology and materials, construct all necessary IRB
materials, run subjects, and analyze the results of their study. This course will culminate in an
APA style paper and poster presentation reporting the results of the research. Because Senior
Project is the culmination of a student’s scientific research learning experience in the psychology major, it is expected that the project will be somewhat novel, will extend the theoretical
understanding of their previous work (or of the previous work of another researcher), and go
well beyond any similar projects that they might have done in any of their previous courses.
(Prerequisites: PSYC-401 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
PSYC-599 
Independent Study
A program of study executed by an individual student with assistance and guidance by an
instructor, outside a regular classroom setting. Guidelines for designing and gaining approval for an independent study are provided in College of Liberal Arts Policy I.D. Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Liberal Arts

Public Policy
PUBL-101 
Foundations of Public Policy
This interdisciplinary course introduces the student to the key concepts of public policy, the policymaking process, the role of stakeholders and interest groups, and the basic dimensions policy
analysis. Those concepts are then applied through a range of issues, such as the environment,
clean energy, climate change, healthcare, cybersecurity, employment, privacy, telecommunications, and innovation, at local, state, federal and international levels. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PUBL-120 
Contemporary Issues in Public Policy
This course provides students the understanding of the concepts of public policy formation
and implementation, the role of citizens, other stakeholders, and interest groups. Students will
engage in analysis of a wide array of contemporary socio-economic issues, through structured
writing assignments and class presentations. The course content is structured to provide students with the skills to increase their writing proficiency, and the opportunities to publicly
communicate and defend their ideas. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

PUBL-510 
Technological Innovation and Public Policy
Technological innovation, the incremental and revolutionary improvements in technology, has
been a major driver in economic, social, military, and political change. This course will introduce generic models of innovation that span multiple sectors including: energy, environment,
health, and bio- and information-technologies. The course also analyzes how governments
choose policies, such as patents, to spur and shape innovation and its impacts on the economy
and society. Students will be introduced to a global perspective on innovation policy including
economic competitiveness, technology transfer and appropriate technology. Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)
PUBL-520 
Information and Communications Policy
This course examines how federal and international policies are developed to influence innovation in, and regulation of, information, computer, and telecommunications technologies.
In particular the course will examine such topics as privacy, freedom of speech, cyber security,
copyrights & intellectual property rights, access to information technology, and the regulation
of the Internet. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

PUBL-201 
Ethics, Values and Public Policy
This course focuses on the connections and interplay between personal and social values, ethics, and public policy. It explores how values and norms influence public policies and how the
resulting expressions of values through public policies impact the implementation and effectiveness of policy choices. It also delves into how different countries make widely different
policy choices based on their citizens’ values and social norms. The course also considers how
new developments in science and technology influence the interplay between values, ethics,
and policy across multiple issues. In addition, this course explores how to formulate valuesbased explanations of certain public policy preferences. Topics range across the policy issue
spectrum. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

PUBL-530 
Energy Policy
This course provides an overview of energy resources, technologies, and policies designed to
ensure clean, stable supplies of energy for the future. The course evaluates the impacts of fossil fuel, renewable energy, and hydrogen technologies on society and how public policies can
be used to influence their development. The development of U.S. energy policy is of particular concern, although a global perspective will be integrated throughout the course. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)

PUBL-210 
Introduction to Qualitative Policy Analysis
This course teaches the practical aspects of doing theoretically informed qualitative social
research with policy applications. Special attention is given to the processes by which research
problems are formulated, research designs selected, data gathered and interpreted, and inferences and conclusions drawn. A variety of tools, such as surveys, interviewing, and content
analysis will be applied to specific case studies covering multiple policy issues. Lecture, Credits
3 (Spring)

STSO-120 
Introduction to Environmental Studies
This course explores the human condition within an environmental context by emphasizing critical environmental problems facing humans on both a global and regional scale. The
approach will be interdisciplinary. The issues, their causes, and their potential solutions will
be analyzed with respect to ethical, social, historical, political, scientific, and technological factors. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

PUBL-301 
Public Policy Analysis
This course provides students with necessary tools to help them become effective policy analysts. The course places particular emphasis on understanding the policy process, the different
approaches to policy analysis, and the application of quantitative methods, such as cost-benefit
analysis, sampling designs, and decision trees. Students will apply these tools to contemporary
public policy decision making at the local, state, federal, and international levels. (Prerequisites:
PUBL-101 or equivalent course.PUBL-101 Prereq) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
PUBL-302 
Decision Analysis
This course provides students with an introduction to decision science and analysis. The course
focuses on several important tools for making good decisions, including forecasting, risk analysis, and multi-attribute decision making. Students will apply these tools to contemporary
public policy decision making at the local, state, federal, and international levels. (Prerequisites:
PUBL-101 or equivalent course.PUBL-101 Prereq) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
PUBL-489 
Special Topics
Allows examination of a special problem or topical area in the field of public policy. Topics
and specific content and methods vary from year to year or term to term. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
PUBL-499 
Public Policy Co-Op
One semester of paid work experience in a professional setting related to the communication
major. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Summer)
PUBL-500 
Senior Project
This project-based course represents the culminating educational experience for public policy
degree students. In the course, students work to identify and analyze a real-world policy-related
problem at the local, state, federal, or international level. Typically, projects are informed by,
and delivered to, outside stakeholders or clients who work with the students to help formulate,
structure, and/or carry out the project. Students work in a team environment under the guidance of a faculty advisor. Under special circumstances students may work individually with
the approval of the program. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

Science, Technology and Society

STSO-140 
Science, Technology, and Values
This course explores the concepts and effects of science and technology on society, analyzes the relationship between science and technology, examines how each has come to play a
major role today, and looks at how science and technology have affected and been affected by
our values. This course also considers the environmental aspects of science and technology.
Science and technology are often assumed to be value free, yet people, guided by individual and
societal values, develop the science and technology. In turn, the choices people make among
the opportunities provided by science and technology are guided by their individual values.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
STSO-201 
Science and Technology Policy
Examines how local, state, federal and international policies are developed to influence innovation, the transfer of technology and industrial productivity in the United States and other
selected nations. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
STSO-220 
Environment and Society
This course introduces the interdisciplinary foundations of environmental science via an
analysis of sustainability within a socio-cultural context. This is a required course for the
environmental science degree program. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
STSO-240 
Social Consequences of Technology
Modern society is increasingly based on technology. With each advance due to technology,
unanticipated problems are also introduced. Society must define and solve these problems or
the advances may be diluted or lost. In this course we study several interactions between technology and the world in which we live. We investigate how various technologies developed
and compare the expected effects of the new technologies with the actual results. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
STSO-326 
History of Ecology and Environmentalism
This course explores the history of ecological science, from the eighteenth century to the present, and it features the political use of ecological ideas in environmental debates, from the
nineteenth century to the present. We investigate how social and political ideas have influenced
ecological science, how ecological concepts have influenced Western politics and society, and
how different generations of ecological researchers have viewed their role in society. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

131

College of Liberal Arts

STSO-330 
Energy and the Environment
This course will examine contemporary energy issues, with particular emphasis placed on the
environmental implications associated with energy consumption and production. Students
will learn about various energy technologies and fuels (including nuclear, coal, oil, natural
gas, solar, biomass, and wind) and the environmental tradeoffs associated with each of these
energy systems. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

STSO-510 
Interdisciplinary Capstone Seminar
This course is an upper-level undergraduate seminar that explores how science, technology,
society, environment and policy are understood in contemporary and historical contexts. The
course brings together a variety of views and readings to offer an interdisciplinary approach
to understanding the complex ways in which citizens make and understand the world.
(Enrollment in Dept.of STS/Public Policy) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

STSO-341 
Biomedical Issues: Science and Technology
A study of the impact of science and technology on life, our view of life and of the value issues
that arise from this impact. Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)

STSO-521 
Biodiversity and Society
This course explores the problems, issues, and values stemming from the current massive loss
of biodiversity. Various justifications for preserving or conserving biodiversity will be examined. Although principals of conservation biology are presented, the social/cultural dimensions
of the issue will be emphasized. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)

STSO-345 
Makers of Modern Science
Approaches the history of science through studying biographies of modern scientists. Modern
science is understood to be science from the Scientific Revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to the present. Emphasis will be on recent scholarship devoted to analyzing
science in context, i.e., the way it actually develops through the lives of individuals, in particular social and political contexts. Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
STSO-346 
Technology in American History
This course explores the development of technology in American history, from the time of first
contact between Europeans and Native Americans to the present. It emphasizes, for different periods in American history: the technological contributions of individuals or distinctive
groups, the main features of important technological systems, and the way technology shaped-and was shaped by--the social, economic, and political institutions of the time. ) Lecture,
Credits 3 (Fall)
STSO-421 
Environmental Policy
This course introduces students to federal, state, and local environmental policies and the
various policy paths leading to their establishment. Students will understand how societal
values inform the content of environmental policies and the impacts, in turn, of these policies
on society. In addition, the class will explore how environmental economics informs the new
tools of environmental policy. The course covers a range of environmental policies at the U.S.
and international levels addressing problems such as air and water pollution, climate change,
energy use, and community sustainability. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
STSO-422 
Great Lakes
This course utilizes the Great Lakes Basin as an integrating context for understanding global
environmental issues. Examining the basin through an interdisciplinary environmental lens the
class applies social science approaches to environmental problem solving. Students assess the
local, regional, national and international scope of Great Lakes environmental issues through
lecture, role-play, and field experiences and consider the importance of government action,
public policy, ethics, economics, sociology, history, and engineering while applying social science analysis skills such as surveys, interviews, and content analysis to better understand the
depth of local environmental problems and their potential solutions. Environmental Science
majors prepare a proposal for an environmental consulting project. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
STSO-441 
Cyborg Theory: (Re)thinking the Human Experience in the 21st Century
The developing cybernetic organism or cyborg challenges traditional concepts of what it means
to be human. Today medical science and science fiction appear to merge in ways unimagined
a century ago. By exploring scientific and cultural theories, science fiction, and public experience, this class examines the history and potential of the cyborg in Western cultures. Lecture,
Credits 3 (Spring)
STSO-445 
The Natural Sciences in Western History
This course explores the development of the natural sciences in Western history, from ancient
times to the present. It emphasizes how astronomy, physics, chemistry, and biology have
changed over time, and it seeks to place those changes in their social, economic, cultural, and
religious contexts. Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
STSO-446 
History of Chemistry
This course surveys the history of chemistry from antiquity to the present. Emphasis will be
placed on developments since the Renaissance; on changing views of how matter is structured
and how different substances react (or fail to react); and on the political, social, and Lecture,
Credits 3 (Biannual)
STSO-489 
Special Topics
Allows examination of a special problem or topical area in the field of STS or Environmental
Studies. Topics and specific content and methods vary from year to year or Semester to
Semester. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)

132	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

STSO-550 
Sustainable Communities
The concept of sustainability has driven many national and international policies. More recently, we have become aware that unless we physical build and rebuild our communities in ways
that contribute to sustainability, making progress toward that goal is unlikely. It is equally
important to recognize the social aspects of sustainability. In addition, it is at the local level
that the goals of equity (a key consideration in community sustainability), most often achieved
through citizen participation and collaborative processes are most easily realized. This course
will broaden students understanding of the concept of sustainability, particularly the concept
of social sustainability. This course focuses on sustainability as a way to bring light to the connections between natural and human communities, between nature and culture, and among
environmental, economic, and social systems. Working closely with local organizations, students will explore the applicability of theoretical concepts. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

Sociology
SOCI-102 
Foundations of Sociology
Sociology is the study of the social world and socialization processes. Sociologists study the
broader picture of how societies are structured and organized through a macro-sociological
analysis as well as how individuals create their own social reality symbolically through their
interactions with others in a micro-sociological analysis. Students in this course will learn the
fundamentals of each approach and come away with a sociological framework which they can
critically apply to their own lives. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOCI-102H 
Honors Sociology
This course explores how sociological concepts, theories and research account for such social
phenomena as socialization, deviance, social structure, stratification, political and religious
affiliation and social change. It will also explore how social factors account for political and
economic behavior and the speed and spread of technological change. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOCI-103 
Urban Experience
Cities have an important effect on social interaction. Through their design, they bring together
diverse groups of people, in unique spatial settings which can create and maintain opportunities
for either interaction or segregation. This course examines theories explaining urban life, the
development and growth of cities, their role in shaping human interaction, and the problems
that emerge within and surrounding them. Topics covered include education, immigration,
residential segregation, poverty, homelessness, crime, sprawl, sustainable development and
urban planning. Lecture, Credits 3
SOCI-210 
African-American Culture
This course will describe the historical and contemporary conditions that have given rise to
the distinctive cultural orientation of African-Americans in the United States. Students will
be provided with an explication of African-American culture as it is perceived by the majority
of African-Americans. Furthermore, the course will outline an operational articulation of the
African-American experience, and analyze the characterological responses that result from it.
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOCI-220 
Minority Group Relations
The course will provide a context in which to examine the multiple and contradictory social
relations of domination, subordination, resistance, and empowerment. The kinds of questions we will explore focus on how power, knowledge, meaning, and cultural representation
are organized. We will analyze a variety of political and ideological themes which bear upon
the formation of minority group relations, their identity and how these themes complicate the
processes by which people construct their understanding of the nation, world, of others, and
themselves. Through reflection on theoretical texts and fictional works, as well as film and other
popular media, we will consider for ourselves how culture is differently represented and signified, and how the politics of understanding and misunderstanding minority relations work
through practices within and outside cultural institutions. Lecture, Credits 3

College of Liberal Arts

SOCI-235 
Women, Work, and Culture
In this course, we analyze historical and contemporary patterns of gender, race/ethnicity, sexuality, and the organization of work. Using the theoretical perspectives we analyze the work
historically undertaken by women in societies and its relationship to broader political and economic structures. While our primary focus is on the U.S., we will also conduct a cross-cultural
analysis of gender and work in developing and industrializing societies. Specific issues include
gender discrimination (e.g., wage discrimination, sexual harassment), sexuality, reproduction, and women organizing to control their work and working conditions. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCI-240 
Deaf Culture in America
This course is an introductory survey of Deaf culture in the United States. Students will study
the scholarly literature pertaining to various social groups in the Deaf community and have
contact with their members. This course will familiarize students with the characteristics of
Deaf Culture, as well as general perceptions of the Deaf community within the dominant mainstream society. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
SOCI-245 
Gender and Health
This course examines connections between gender and health that are both conceptual and
empirical. Students will explore the causes of gender-based differences in health outcomes
through case studies of sexual and reproductive rights, HIV/AIDS epidemics and violence.
Students will also examine global gender and health trends. The course concludes with an
examination of gender inequity in health care and policy implications of these inequities.
(Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or SOCI-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCI-255 Disaster! Assessing Vulnerabilities and Responses to Global States of Emergency
Disasters as global states of emergency result from complex relationships between human populations and environmental hazards. Disasters threaten sustainable development, especially
in the global south and among the world’s most vulnerable people. Global states of emergency
incur significant human and economic costs, which, in addition to increasing demographic,
environmental, socio-economic and related pressures, result in increasing population vulnerability. Explanations of the causes and consequences of disasters include examinations of how
human vulnerability is impacted by interactions among diverse social, economic, and other
factors with environmental hazards. We will discuss social vulnerability theories; sustainable
development theories; the causes and consequences of disasters and interventions to manage and reduce these risks. (Prerequisites: SOCI-102 or ANTH-102 or INGS-101 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOCI-301 
Social and Cultural Theory
This course explores influential classical and contemporary theories regarding society and culture. Students will assess the utility of different theories in addressing key enduring questions
regarding human behavior, the organization of society, the nature of culture, the relationship
between the individual and society, social control and social conflict, social groups and social
hierarchy, the operation of power, cultural and social change, and the interplay between the
global and the local. Theories will be marshaled to shed light on contemporary social and
cultural phenomena and problems such as crime, violence, exploitation, modernity, and globalization. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or ANTH-103 or SOCI-102 or SOCI-103
or INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
SOCI-302 
Qualitative Research
Learning about social and cultural groups is a complex and ethically sensitive process. In this
course, we explore common qualitative research methods for social and cultural research. We
evaluate the utility of such methods for different purposes and contexts, including cross-cultural contexts. We consider common ethical dilemmas in research with human subjects, the
ethical responsibilities of researchers, and common techniques for minimizing risks to subjects. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or ANTH-103 or SOCI-102 or SOCI-103 or
INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
SOCI-303 
Quantitative Research
The research conducted by sociologists and anthropologists generates large, complex data sets
that are difficult to interpret subjectively. Multivariate quantitative methods are an important
tool for understanding these data. This course presents an introduction to quantitative research
in sociology and anthropology: how to craft a research question and research design that utilize
quantitative data, how to select appropriate quantitative techniques and apply them, how to
present results, and how to critically evaluate quantitatively based knowledge claims. Topics
include: research design, collecting and cod-ing data, non-metric data, data screening, exploratory data analysis, selection and use of appropriate analysis techniques, comparing groups,
exploration of variance, classification, and modeling. The course features laboratory exercises
and a final project in which the student selects a research problem and data set, which they
analyze and present to the class. . (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or ANTH-103 or
SOCI-102 or SOCI-103 or INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3

	

SOCI-315 
Global Exiles of War and Terror
Daily we watch, seemingly helplessly, as people are displaced from their communities, homelands, and countries and subsequently seek asylum around the world, sometimes within our
own local communities. Causes of displacement include war, violence, persecution, and modes
of terror that increasingly affect the lives of women and children. In addition to the loss of
human life and potential, the ensuing consequences of violent displacement include poverty,
disease, physical and psychological trauma, hopelessness, and vulnerability to human rights
abuses. In this course, we explore how the rights and dignity of refugees can be protected. We
also examine resettlement processes and, for those who are eventually repatriated, we address
how they can successfully reintegrate into reconstructing societies that remain barely functional. Most importantly, we consider how the trauma of displacement can be minimized.
(Prerequisites: SOCI-102 or ANTH-102 or INGS-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
SOCI-320 
Population and Society
This course examines systematic theories of population dynamics, and considers demographic changes as causes and consequences of social processes. Students will participate in group
projects that synthesize related material, complete written responses to reading assignments,
and participate in class discussions. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or SOCI-102
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
SOCI-330 
Urban Deviance
This course investigates crime in urban communities in the United States. As such we will
investigate crime in the central city by examining explanations as to the differential patterns
of crime in urban neighborhoods, the influence of race, class, and gender inequality in differences in crime, and the response of the criminal justice system to crime in urban context.
Specific readings will include both historical and contemporary perspectives that seek to explain
patterns of urban crime, the impact of crime and violence in neighborhoods, inequality and
crime in urban context, and the impact of the criminal justice system on crime and people who
inhabit urban neighborhoods. (Prerequisites: SOCI-102 or SOCI-103 or equivalent course.)
Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOCI-335 
Urban Cultures
This course examines the perennial ability of American cities to attract and maintain the loyalty
of a diverse population of individuals who prefer to live in an environment which is fastpaced, change-oriented, privacy-protecting and open to social and cultural experimentation.
It explains how the vibrancy of the creative class fuels innovation and provides the city with
the energy and stimulation to meet the needs of a vast array of citizens while remaining ever
open to the contributions of newcomers. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or SOCI102 or SOCI-103 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Biannual)
SOCI-345 
Urban Poverty
Urban poverty has been recognized as a persistent problem in the United States since the middle
of the last century. In many cities, poverty is associated with high levels of teenage pregnancy,
low levels of employment, limited educational attainment, chronic community-based health
problems, and high levels of crime. This course examines causes, consequences, and proposed policy solutions to urban poverty. Special emphasis will be paid to U.S. urban poverty.
(Prerequisites: SOCI-102 or SOCI-103 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3
SOCI-350 
Social Change
This course describes and applies competing explanations for major transitions in a variety
of institutions, including the economy, work, politics, family and education. These transitions are seen within historical and global contexts, but the interplay of these changing social
structures with individual experience is explored as well. Topics include economic, racial and
gender stratification, culture, labor-management relations, and the source and consequences
of technological change. Students will learn to understand, assess, and manage social change
rather than to simply react to it. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H or SOCI-102 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOCI-390 
Marxist Perspectives
This course will provide a critical analysis and historical overview of the Marxist tradition in
anthropology and sociology. Special attention will be given to comparing the various Marxist
schools as well as outlining the neo-Marxist project and its importance for a cultural refiguration of Marxist perspectives in the social sciences. (Prerequisites: ANTH-102 or ANTH-102H
or SOCI-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
SOCI-410 
Diversity in the City
This course examines the city as an amalgamation of diverse communities, with people engaged
in interpreting and responding to urban life. It examines changes in the structure of urban
neighborhoods, and how these neighborhoods are impacted by social, economic, spatial and
political conditions. Issues such as ethnic enclaves, urban poverty, homelessness, unemployment, public and park space and ethnic/racial segregation will be investigated. (Prerequisites:
SOCI-103 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

133

College of Liberal Arts

SOCI-451 
Economics of Women and the Family
This course applies economic theory to explain choices faced and selected by women concerning marriage, fertility and labor market participation, alongside government policies targeting
those decisions. Empirical research will be presented that describes the changing demographic
profile of families, poverty and the labor force. Students in this course will gain experience evaluating how economic theory and practice fits into the larger social sciences goal of describing
human behavior by focusing on women and the family. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)
SOCI-489 
Special Topics
This course introduces a topic new to the Sociology and Anthropology curriculum. Topic varies by semester Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCI-498 Practicum
Students will apply the accumulated knowledge, theory, and methods of the discipline to problem solving outside of the classroom. The Practicum may consist of internship, study abroad,
or archaeological or ethnographic field school (consisting of at least 160 hours, completed
over at least 4 weeks). (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year
standing.) INT, Credits 0 - 16 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCI-499 Co-op
Paid work experience in a field related to sociology or urban studies (at least 160 hours of work,
completed over at least four weeks). Students will apply the accumulated knowledge, theory,
and methods of the discipline to problem solving outside of the classroom. (3rd year status
and permission of instructor) (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least
3rd year standing.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCI-501 
Senior Research Project
Students will design and conduct a library-based research project with supervision of a faculty
member, bringing to bear the knowledge and theoretical perspectives accumulated during the
prior years of study. (Prerequisites: ANTH-201 or ANTH-301 or ANTH-302 or ANTH-303 or
equivalent courses and 4th year standing.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
SOCI-599 
Independent Study
The student explores in depth a topic of choice, under supervision of a faculty member. The
student will typically meet weekly with the instructor to discuss the readings and will write
paper(s) that synthesize and critique them, or the student may work with the faculty member
on original research. (permission of the instructor) (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 12 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

Women and Gender Studies
WGST-200 
Foundations of Women and Gender Studies
This course will use an interdisciplinary perspective to provide an introduction to Women’s
and Gender Studies. The course will focus on the rise of feminist consciousness in the western
world from the Middle Ages to the late 20th century. It will consider the concept of patriarchy,
its dominance for the past four millennia, and the multitude of efforts by women and men to
conceptualize an alternative worldview. The course will consider key historical patriarchal and
feminist texts, study the rise of feminist thought, and consider the history of women’s activism and the women’s rights movement from the late 18th century through the second half
of the 20th century. The course will also consider feminist theory and the rise of feminism.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
WGST-206 
Queer Looks
In this course we examine representations of queer sexuality in art, film and popular culture
beginning in the repressive 1950s, followed by the Stonewall Riots of 1969. We situate the birth
of gay liberation in the U.S. in the context of the civil rights struggles, feminism and the antiwar movement. We turn to the work of Andy Warhol that looms over the post-war period,
challenged subsequently by the onset of AIDS and the work of General Idea and Act-Up, on the
one hand, and the more graphically provocative work of Robert Mapplethorpe, on the other.
We examine the diversification of the queer community as transgendered identity asserts itself
and the opening of popular culture to issues of diverse sexual identities. We explore expressions of queer sensibility outside of North America and Europe. We turn finally to the issue of
gay marriage, both in the U.S. and abroad. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
WGST-210 
Introduction to LGBT Studies
This introductory course examines a broad range of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender
issues within the historical, psychological, racial, theological, cultural, and legal contexts in
which we live. Students will learn the historical and theoretical foundations of GLBT studies
as well as the contemporary implications for family, work, religion and law for GLBT people
and the mainstream society. Students will have the opportunity to compare the regulation of
sexual orientation across different gender, racial, and socioeconomic communities. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)

134	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

WGST-235 
Women, Work, and Culture
In this course, we analyze historical and contemporary patterns of gender, race/ethnicity, sexuality, and the organization of work. Using the theoretical perspectives we analyze the work
historically undertaken by women in societies and its relationship to broader political and economic structures. While our primary focus is on the U.S., we will also conduct a cross-cultural
analysis of gender and work in developing and industrializing societies. Specific issues include
gender discrimination (e.g., wage discrimination, sexual harassment), sexuality, reproduction, and women organizing to control their work and working conditions. Lecture, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WGST-237 
Psychology of Gender
The purpose of this course is to examine the psychology and lives of girls and women. In addition to the influence of culture, biological and genetic differences will be highlighted for each
of the different topics. The topics covered include gender stereotypes, the development of gender roles, gender comparisons, love relationships, sexuality, motherhood and violence against
women. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WGST-245 
Prostitution and Vice
This course will examine prostitution and vice in the United States and globally. Through
empirical scholarship, various issues will be examined including issues faced by sex workers including crime, victimization, health and safety, and law and policy issues. Quality of life
issues for communities will also be examined. (Prerequisites: CRIM-110 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
WGST-250 
Domestic Violence
This course focuses on domestic violence in the United States and globally. Various types of
domestic violence will be examined, including intimate partner violence, child abuse, and elder
abuse. The course will also examine criminal justice responses to domestic violence, including police, court processing of domestic violence cases and punishment of domestic violence
offenders. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
WGST-255 
Seminar on Sexual Violence
This course focuses on sexual violence in the United States and globally. Various types of sexual
violence will be examined, including incest, elder abuse, and male victimization. The course
will also examine criminal justice responses to sexual violence, including police, court processing of sexual violence cases and punishment and treatment of sexual offenders. (Prerequisites:
CRIM-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
WGST-265 
Women and Crime
This course deals with women as criminal offenders and as victims of crime, focusing upon
theories about women in crime, types of crimes committed, patterns of criminality and the
treatment of women offenders. Also examines the role of women as law enforcement officers,
judges, lawyers and correctional officers in the criminal justice system. (Prerequisites: CRIM110 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
WGST-309 
Feminist Theory
This course examines the main currents in contemporary feminist thought. Feminist theory
explores the nature and effects of categories of sex and gender upon our ways of living, thinking
and doing, while also challenging how gendered assumptions might shape our conceptions of
identity and inquiry more generally. Different conceptions of sex and gender will be discussed,
and the course will investigate how these concepts affect our lives in both concrete and symbolic
ways. Special attention will be paid to how gendered assumptions color our understanding of
knowledge production, experiences of embodiment and emotion, public and private activities, and the nature of ethical decision making. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WGST-361 
Queering Gender
This course begins with the concept that sexuality, gender and gender identity is neither fixed
nor innate. Many people who adopt a definition or expression of gender different from society
often identify themselves as queer. The study of this movement is referred to as queer theory.
This course examines the concepts of sex, gender and gender expression of straight, gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people of all ages, races, and socioeconomic classes within the
context of the larger society in which we live. Students will explore the unique political, legal
and interpersonal challenges faced by those embracing queer identity as well as the diversity
of gender identities and expressions. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
WGST-375 Women/Gender/Art
This course examines the role of women in the visual arts as both images makers and subject
matter in order to see how gender plays a role in the conceptualization of creativity and art.
Among the topics to be discussed are: the construction of femininity and gender in the patriarchy; art as an ideological practice; women, art, and society; art history, art education, and art
evaluation; women artists and their contemporaries. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Liberal Arts

WGST-384 
Art of Dying
This course explores the experience of dying a profoundly human and universal experience
as it is represented by artists who are themselves facing immanent death. The unique and
deeply personal process of each dying artist is crucially informed by social, cultural and historical as well as artistic contexts. The course will focus primarily on visual artists and writers
living with and dying of disease - such as AIDS, cancer and cystic fibrosis as well as mortality
and age. Topics such as aesthetics, artistic media, representation, grief, bereavement, illness,
care-giving, aging, and the dying process will be considered within the context of issues of
race, class, ethnicity, sexuality, gender and community values. Some of the artists covered
will be Jo Spence, Hannah Wilke, Elias Canetti, Bob Flanagan, Herve Guibert, Tom Joslin,
Laurie Lynd, Audre Lorde, Charlotte Salomon, Keith Haring, Frida Kahlo, Bas Jan Ader, Ted
Rosenthal, Felix Gonzalez Torres, Keith Haring, Eric Steel, Derek Jarman, Eric Michaels, and
David Wojnarowicz. We will also explore some of the critical theory of Roland Barthes, Michel
Foucault, Elaine Scarry, Susan Sontag, and Ross Chambers. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
WGST-451 
Economics of Women and the Family
This course applies economic theory to explain choices faced and selected by women concerning marriage, fertility and labor market participation, alongside government policies targeting
those decisions. Empirical research will be presented that describes the changing demographic
profile of families, poverty and the labor force. Students in this course will gain experience evaluating how economic theory and practice fits into the larger social sciences goal of describing
human behavior by focusing on women and the family. (Prerequisites: ECON-101 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

135

Center for Multidisciplinary Studies

Center for Multidisciplinary Studies
Index
BUSI	
CMDS	
MTSC	
QLTM	
TCOM	

Business Administration Management.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Interdisciplinary Studies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Math and Science. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Quality Management .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Technical Communication. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

136
136
137
138
138

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Business Administration Management
BUSI-205 
Managing the Workforce
A general introduction to concepts in managing individuals, groups, and teams. Topics include
motivation, the influence of culture and demographics, communication, conflict resolution,
and decision-making. Extensive use is made of learning groups in which students work together to discuss and apply concepts. *Note: The course is open only to students at the American
University in Kosovo (AUK)*. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least
2nd year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BUSI-221 
New Venture Development
This course presents factors to be considered by those interested in the ownership and management of small business enterprises. Includes who should be an entrepreneur, guidelines
for starting a new business, basic legal considerations, and approaches for obtaining credit
and capital. Revised course includes staffing, purchasing, supplier relations, cash flow management, and managerial skills needed to run any business or corporate department. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
BUSI-320 
International Project Finance
This course looks at methods and strategies to finance large-scale international natural resource
and public/private infrastructure projects. Non-recourse or limited recourse financing is an
alternative to conventional methods of financing large scale projects throughout the world. This
course differentiates project financing from traditional corporate financing models. The role
and structure of international financial institutions is explored along with the legal, political and
public policy considerations involved in project financing. *Note: The course is only available
to American University in Kosovo (AUK) students*. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 2nd year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
BUSI-324 
Introduction to Logistics and Transportation
The course studies the logistics and transportation industry as part of the growing emphasis
on distribution technologies. Introduces basic understandings of the function areas of logistics management and their interrelationships and how transportation and distribution play a
significant role in the success of a business. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students
with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
BUSI-409 
Core Concepts of Project Management
Focuses on the skills of project management and is organized around the project management life cycle, providing students with basic project management concepts: Projects, Project
Manager, Organizational Structure, Team Make-up, Planning, Scheduling, Budgeting, PERT/
CPM, Resources, Monitoring & Control, and Termination. Introduces the Framework and 9
Knowledge Areas of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®Guide)
as defined by the Project Management Institute (PMI). Course not intended for those students
planning to take advanced course work in project management and may not be substituted for
0681-410 Introduction to Project Management. Students should have elementary management
experience. (Prerequisite: MGMT-150, MGMT-215, STAT-145 or MTSC-211 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)

136	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

BUSI-411 
Advanced Project Management
Advanced Project Management covers the topics necessary for implementation of and excellence in project management. It deals with turning the principles and theory of project
management into practice. The course addresses the best practices for project management
globally, including; project portfolio management and ROI; mergers and acquisitions, the
project office and Six Sigma; integrated processes; corporate cultures and behavior; informal,
adaptive, and extreme project management; and critical chain project management. It integrates aspects of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide).
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BUSI-412 
International Project Management
With the increasing frequency of globalization, mergers, and acquisitions, international projects are becoming more prevalent and approaching the norm for many organizations. This
course addresses a wide range of international projects — based in different industries and
multiple countries. It deals with cultural and social differences within firms, among countries,
and within countries; language and dialect variations; varying project management practices
and structures; religious practices; legal, regulatory, and reporting requirements; technology and infrastructure differences; time zone differences; and political contexts. (BUSI-410,
BUSI-411; or permission of the instructor). Credits 3 (F,S,Su)Note: BUSI-412, an undergraduate course, is sometimes co-listed with BUSI-712; however, BUSI-412 may not be substituted
for BUSI-712 in a CMS graduate concentration or the CMS Advanced Certificate in Project
Management. Additionally, a student may not register for and receive credit for both BUSI412 and BUSI-712, whether taken as an undergraduate or graduate student. Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BUSI-510 
Project Management
This course addresses project management from a multidisciplinary perspective, covering
the fundamental nature of and techniques for managing a broad range of projects. Topics
cover the Project Management Life Cycle from Planning to Termination. It also addresses the
behavioral and quantitative facets of project management, as well as the use of methods, tools
and techniques for the initiation, planning, and execution of projects. Introduces the standard
framework, processes and knowledge areas of A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK®Guide) as defined by the Project Management Institute (PMI). Project
Management is available in on campus and online formats. *Note: BUSI-510, an undergraduate course, is sometimes co-listed with BUSI-710; however, BUSI-510 may not be substituted
for BUSI-710 in a CMS graduate concentration or the CMS Advanced Certificate in Project
Management. Additionally, a student may not register for and receive credit for both BUSI510 and BUSI-710, whether taken as an undergraduate or graduate student.* (Prerequisite:
MGMT-150, MGMT-215, STAT-145 or MTSC-211 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Interdisciplinary Studies
CMDS-205 
Practicing and Assessing Leadership
By integrating course concepts of leadership styles and theories with a leadership field experience, students will be able to assess their skills as a leader and create a plan for growth and
development for future success. Each student will be required to create a leadership learning
agenda and development plan at the beginning of the quarter based on their current leadership
experience. The learning agenda will identify goals for achievement and strategies for assessing and improving upon their effectiveness as a leader. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMDS-211 
Exploring Innovation
Innovation of some type occurs in all fields and disciplines. This course, which helps students
develop an innovative mind set, discusses the nature of innovation, including what innovation is, the goals and objectives of innovation, how innovation happens, and reasons that
innovations succeed or fail. Case studies in a variety of disciplines are explored to further
understanding of innovation. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least
2nd year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMDS-233 
Teams and Team Development
This course focuses on the development of the essential skills needed to be an effective team
member and understand the characteristics of high-performing teams in the workplace.
Students develop a strong framework for building effective teams through topics that include
group and team theory research, individual behavior styles and their functions in a team and
team leadership, evaluation of team effectiveness, and understanding of negotiation, persuasion and conflict resolution. This course is highly interactive, with projects that require the
student to participate in a team to evaluate cross-functional work teams, self-directed teams,
and integrated work teams. Learning takes place through lectures, case studies, simulations,
and group projects that develop strategies to build strong teams. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Center for Multidisciplinary Studies

CMDS-240 
The Harmonica and the Blues
From the mid-1800s to today, the harmonica has largely been learned informally, passed down
by generations of musicians who have used it to play melodies, solos, and chord accompaniment. It was a natural for the blues because of its human voice-like quality and flexible way
to play “blue” notes. Blues musicians developed a harmonica style that reverberates in many
musical styles today. This interdisciplinary course focuses on the history and culture of the
harmonica and the blues. Students learn about era-related harmonica styles, influential harmonica players, the basics of playing blues-style diatonic harmonica, and the fundamentals
of sound. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 2nd year standing.)
Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMDS-298 
Independent Study
Independent study. Independent Study 3, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMDS-299 
Special Topics
Special topics are experimental courses offered per semester. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
CMDS-333 
Wicked Problems
This course will expose students to approaching and working on “wicked” problems - unstructured, multidisciplinary issues lacking clear “right or wrong” answers. The course will introduce
key skills for handling unstructured problems such as whole systems thinking, estimation
and assumptions, valuation, and problem solving techniques, with the majority of the semester focused on a specific topic (wicked problem) and team case study. Students will work in
teams to research and address one aspect or subset of the “wicked” problem at hand to join
collectively with the results of all teams to form a more complete overall solution to the wicked
problem. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMDS-362 
High Performance Leadership
Leadership today is challenging at best when considering all the complexities of the 21st century work environment. In this course students will explore, discuss and practice effective
strategies and behaviors to lead others, teams and organizations for high performance. Areas
of focus include: leadership roles, theories and styles, creating a shared vision, coaching skills,
teamwork and group dynamics, cultural communication and influence, and ethical decision
making. Course work will include extensive readings, case studies, written reports, small group
projects, presentations and reflections. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CMDS-411 
The Practice of Innovation and Invention
This course comprehensively examines how innovation translates new ideas or inventions into
practical use in the form of products, markets or services, concepts or systems. The practice
of innovation requires understanding different innovation paradigms; the role of creativity, discovery and invention; entrepreneurialism as an implementation strategy; intellectual
property issues; team building and collaboration; and experience. Selected case studies and
exemplary problems are explored to illustrate the principles and to acquire the skills of innovation. (Prerequisite: CMDS-211 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CMDS-431 
Understanding Organizational Culture
Organizational culture exists in all kinds of organizations including profit-seeking firms,
non-profit organizations and government agencies. It is a primary determinate for how well
employees function together and like working in the place they do. Ultimately organizational
effectiveness and success depends on a healthy organizational culture. This course introduces
organizational culture and methods of analyzing it. The course takes an interdisciplinary functionalist view of organizational culture and subcultures as being: (a) things observed, felt, heard
and expressed by employees; (b) organizational values espoused in mission statements, goals,
ideals, norms, standards, and moral principles; and (c) underlying assumptions of employees
about their roles, responsibilities and relationships given available resources relative to client/
constituency performance expectations, applicable labor-management agreements and regulatory/safety compliance issues. Methods for analyzing the health of organizational culture and
subcultures are related to various kinds of circumstances faced by firms, organizations and
agencies. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CMDS-441 
Creative Critical Thinking and Problem Solving
An interdisciplinary approach to the generation and evaluation of ideas and solutions. Includes
analysis of the conditions limiting creativity and the development of a "toolkit" of strategies and
techniques for discovering, inventing and assessing new, unique and useful ideas, applications
and solutions. Applicable to a range of life and work situations, from complex environmental
concerns to competitive business challenges to family disputes. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring,
Summer)

	

CMDS-461 
Leading in a Global Environment
The ability to communicate successfully, demonstrate leadership and navigate cultural complexities rank among the most critical competencies for professionals who work in global
environment. In this course, students will explore the impact of globalization, both positive
and negative. In addition, they will examine the process of adapting to a new culture and will
develop skills for interacting successfully across culture. By looking closely at their own and
others values, perspectives and decision-making processes, students will have an opportunity
to consider how differing approaches can benefit idea generation, communication and problem
solving. The course will also introduce them to the traits that successful global leaders possess,
which students will then apply to a variety of situations, including conflict resolution, as well
as to other current topics that are of concern in the global arena. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CMDS-497 
Special Topics
Special topics are experimental courses offered per semester. See course catalog for current
titles. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMDS-498 
Independent Study
Independent study. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year
standing.) Independent Study 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMDS-499 
Co-op Applied Arts and Science
One semester or summer block of paid work experience in a position commensurate with the
student’s approved plan of study. Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMDS-500 
Senior Capstone
This course focuses on a project that demonstrates how the student’s multidisciplinary plan of
study has prepared him/her for future academic and career activities. Students will integrate
their multidisciplinary concentrations through a capstone project and supplementary exercises.
The student will execute his/her identified project and prepare the finished project for public presentation and review by an approved Client or Subject Matter Expert, SME. Additional
emphasis will be placed on the acquisition of networking and similar professional skills such
as interviewing techniques, research techniques, and making use of academic, business, and
personal networks. (This class is restricted to degree seeking students with at least 4th year
level.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMDS-510 
Multidisciplinary Life
A capstone class for students in the Applied Arts and Sciences bachelor of science degree program. Course provides students an opportunity to reflect upon and enhance the many aspects
of their individualized educational programs and focus on future goals. Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
CMDS-511 
Innovation Lab
This course builds on the skills and knowledge gained in CMDS-211 Exploring Innovation
and CMDS-411 The Practice of Innovation and Invention. In the course students engage as
members of an interdisciplinary project team exploring a complex, non-trivial problem for
which an innovation in science, technology, design, business, artistic expression, etc., could
be significant for working toward a resolution of the problem. Problems may be proposed by
students or by faculty mentors, or derived from external sources. After selecting a problem,
each team works throughout the semester designing a solution, culminating in a formal written report and oral presentation at the conclusion of the project. (Prerequisite: CMDS-411 or
equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

Math and Science
MTSC-111 
Interdisciplinary Math I
A foundation course covering the basic mathematical and algebraic skills required to analyze
and interpret a variety of real-life applications. Skills covered include: signed numbers, fractions, algebraic manipulations, graphic relationships, linear functions, linear systems, linear
programming, non-linear functions (polynomial, rational, exponential and logarithmic), and
the basic mathematics of finance. Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MTSC-112 
Interdisciplinary Math II
A course covering the manipulative skills of differential and integral calculus that are required
to analyze and interpret a variety of real-life applications. Skills covered include: limits, derivatives, applications of derivatives, integrals, and applications of integrals. Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

137

Center for Multidisciplinary Studies

MTSC-211 
Introduction to Statistics I
This is a first semester introductory course in statistics. Students will learn how to use statistics in a variety of application areas across many disciplines including business, science and
the social sciences. Topics include descriptive statistics for qualitative and quantitative data,
discrete (binomial, Poisson) and continuous (uniform, normal) probability distributions, sampling and sampling distributions of sample means and proportions. Computer technology
and report writing will be utilized throughout the course, for both simulations and computations. (Saunders College of Business students are not permitted to take this course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MTSC-212 
Introduction to Statistics II
This is a second semester introductory course in statistics. Students will learn how to use statistics in a variety of application areas across many disciplines including business, science
and the social sciences. Topics include the Central Limit Theorem, confidence intervals and
hypothesis testing, (one and two sample proportions and means, variation), correlation and
regression (simple and multiple), goodness-of-fit, contingency tables, one and two-way analysis of variance, nonparametric statistics, and statistical process control. Computer technology
and report writing will be utilized throughout the course, for both simulations and computations. (Saunders College of Business students are not permitted to take this course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
MTSC-231 
Contemporary Science: Biology
An introduction to the fundamental principles of biology for non-science majors and the application of these concepts to areas of compelling interest in our contemporary, technological
society. Topics include cells, genes, evolution, and ecology with specific attention to stem cells,
cancer, DNA technology and other contemporary issues. Students apply biology concepts using
a laboratory kit. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MTSC-232 
Contemporary Science: Chemistry
An introduction to the fundamental principles of chemistry for non-science majors and the
application of these concepts to areas of compelling interest in our contemporary, technological society. Topics discussed include: environmental chemistry, water and air purity, chemistry
of prescription drugs, old and new energy sources, green gases, atomic theory, chemical compounds and reactions, nutrition, biological chemistry, plastic and macromolecular chemistry.
This course includes an online lab component. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MTSC-233 
Contemporary Science: Physics
An introduction to the fundamental principles of physics for non-science majors, and the application of these concepts to areas of interest and concern in our contemporary technological
society. The conceptual basis for the phenomena of heat, light, sound, mechanics, electricity and magnetism is discussed and related to such topics as astronomy, space exploration,
lasers and environmental concerns. This course includes an online lab component. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MTSC-234 
Contemporary Science: Oceanus
An introduction to the fundamental principles of oceanography for non-science majors and the
application of these concepts to areas of compelling interest in our contemporary, technological society. Topics include chemistry, geology, meteorology, physics, ecology, taxonomy, and
scientific history, with specific attention to ecology and other contemporary issues. Students
apply oceanographic concepts using a laboratory kit. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MTSC-240 
History and Manufacture of Siege Weapons
In this course, students will learn the history of sieges and the development of siege weapons
throughout the ages, from early Sumeria to the mid-1900s. Technologies used in the manufacture of siege weapons will be demonstrated in hands-on projects and assignments. Students
will then use this historical and technological knowledge to construct prototypes and design
their own siege weapons. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 2nd
year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Quality Management
QLTM-310 
Introduction to Quality
This course provides an introduction to the fundamental concepts of quality management. It
includes an overview of the competitive environment, the cost of poor quality, and the history of quality; a systematic examination of the leading definitions of quality and models of
quality management; and an exploration of the implication of quality management concepts
for organizational structure and roles, decision making and interpersonal relations. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

138	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

QLTM-340 
Quality Data Analysis
This course is an introduction to statistics and probability that provides students with techniques to analyze and interpret quality control data. Topics include problem solving techniques
such as the fishbone and flowcharting; descriptive statistics (statistical tables and graphs, measures of central tendency and dispersion); hypothesis testing; distributions commonly used in
quality management; and one-way ANOVA. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
QLTM-410 
Introduction to Lean Six Sigma
Six Sigma techniques, introduced to industry in the late 1980’s, use data-driven decisions to
reduce defects, drive down costs and increase efficiency. This methodology focuses on minimizing process variation, thereby enabling the process to operate more smoothly and efficiently.
Lean is a process that focuses on eliminating waste and streamlining operations. Lean Six
Sigma combines the two processes, providing a powerful tool to make improvements in any
process or business. In this course, students learn the history, context, and tools of Lean/Six
Sigma and apply the process in a course project. (QLTM-310; QLTM-340; or permission of
instructor) Class 3, Credit 3 (F) (Prerequisite: QLTM-310 or QLTM-340 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
QLTM-420 
Statistical Quality Tools
An introductory course in Statistical Quality Control techniques used in determining operating
quality levels and recognizing degrees of process control and capability in a service industry
or a manufacturing process. Topics include sources of variation; construction and interpretation of charts for variables and attributes; process capability; acceptance sampling; and design
of experiments (DOE) concepts. (Prerequisite: QLTM-340 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall)
QLTM-430 
Management for Quality
Successful companies integrate quality techniques and concepts throughout their operations.
This course addresses issues in developing and managing an effective organization, including
defining a quality philosophy, delighting the customer, the role of strategic planning, enhancing the employee involvement, and sustaining quality initiatives. Additional topics include
evaluating quality standards and systems, benchmarking, and vendor and supplier assurance.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Technical Communication
TCOM-271 
Effective Web Design II
This course introduces students to user-centered web graphics and design, with an emphasis
on dynamic web development. Students will learn to integrate imperatives of user-centered
interface with principles of aesthetic design, to bring effective information architecture to the
digital landscape. Current topics in web development, such as XHTML, ActionScript, XML,
PHP, ColdFusion, and JavaScript will be discussed. Students will demonstrate proficiency in
Adobe Flash, or other current web development software, through the creation of animated
graphics and web content. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
TCOM-320 
Professional Presentations
People who are able to effectively present information to an audience are more likely to be successful in their careers. In this course, students learn to develop and present information to a
variety of audiences. The course focuses on targeting specific audiences, using the beauty of
language in writing speeches and other types of presentations, applying delivery techniques,
using media, and overcoming the fear of public speaking. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
TCOM-325 
Business Communication
This course focuses on the development of communication skills essential to functioning effectively in the business world. Students learn the process of analyzing communication situations
and responding to them. Topics include an overview of business communication, writing
well, delivering business communications, tools for talking in crucial conversations, oral and
interpersonal communication including listening skills, public speaking, cross-cultural communication, communicating in the digital age, teamwork and accepting change. *Note: This
course cannot be taken by students in the Saunders College of Business.* (This class is restricted
to undergraduate students with at least 2nd year standing. Saunders College of Business students are not permitted to take this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
TCOM-327 
Environmental, Health and Safety Professsional Communication
Communication of environmental, health and safety information and issues is critical for
awareness, information, and action. Students develop skill in reporting and conveying environmental and scientific information as well as an understanding of the role of the media and
public relations in the environmental communication process. Course participants also learn
strategies and formats for communicating safety information, especially in procedures and
instructional materials. Writing and speaking skills are sharpened for successful business,
media and crisis communication. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

TCOM-333 
Technical Writing and Editing
Introduces students to reports, proposals, instructions and other documents employed in the
contemporary technical workplace and develops the skills needed to create them successfully.
Includes adapting content and language for audience and purpose and integrating visuals to
support and enhance communication. Editing projects build skill in evaluating writing strategies and effectiveness. The various roles, as well as the ethics, of technical communication in
the modern technical are covered. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

TCOM-435 
Promotional Writing
This course introduces students to the techniques and approaches needed to create promotional materials used in marketing, sales, publicity and establishing organizational identify.
The advantages, uses and guidelines of creating print media applications;, including direct
mail, catalogs, brochures, and other publicity and identity pieces; web site materials; and film
and video pieces are presented. Students will create a short script and pieces for print and web
distribution. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

TCOM-356 
Strategic Communications
This course uses a case study approach to introduce students to the techniques and process
needed to solve organizational communication problems. Students study and analyze a variety
of cases wherein strategic communication played critical roles and develop skill in planning
effective communication plans and campaigns. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

TCOM-444 
Science Writing
Course introduces students to the writing process for describing scientific and technological subject matter for presentation to general audiences. Students will learn to gather needed
source material and organize, write and edit articles that cover developments in the scientific
and technological communities. Various article formats used in professional, in-house, trade
and popular publications are presented. *Note: This course is cross-listed with TCOM-614.
Students cannot receive credit for both 444 and 614.* Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

TCOM-361 
Research Techniques
This course offers exposure to and experience with electronic and traditional resources for
information generation. Student assignments include fact-finding assignments and culminate
in an extended research project of the student’s choice. Students use problem-solving strategies,
assess project requirements, collect data, report periodically on their progress, and formally
present their results. A variety of research methodologies are introduced, including accessing
digital databases, interviewing skills, developing and using questionnaires, and review and use
of literature. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
TCOM-380 
Design for Print and Web
Students use vector and bit-map imaging software to design a range of graphic projects suited
to Web and print formats. Projects include photographic imaging, layout, vector editing, digital
painting and retouching, typography, Internet graphics, and collaboration. Class discussions
cover current professional design topics. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

TCOM-476 
Instructional Design Principles
This course presents an overview of the process of designing instructional packages from need
and task analysis through identifying goals and objectives, media selection, program development and validation testing. Additional focus is given to managing the development process
and making a business cases to justify the cost/value of such projects to decision makers within
an organization. (This class is restricted to undergraduate students with at least 3rd year standing.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

TCOM-381 
Photo Imaging I
Students will use photographic imaging software to create, combine, and modify graphic imagery. Topics will include retouching, tonal adjustments, custom brushes and pattern, raster text,
spatial illusion, masking techniques, animation, and compositing. Students will research and
discuss professional design, effective visual communication, copyrights, and photographic
illustration. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
TCOM-382 
Photo Imaging II
Students will use photographic imaging techniques to produce illustrations, web graphics,
composited photographic imagery, and corrected photographs. Techniques learned in previous
courses will combine to bring new results.Topics include image correction, duotones, channels,
photographic illustration, path shapes, concept presentation, digital asset management, and
advanced layer techniques. Students will explore and discuss design and professional issues
and innovations. Bit-mapped imaging (in Adobe Photoshop) is presented in a hands-on, twoterm sequence. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
TCOM-383 
Designing Vector Graphics
Students will use vector graphic software (Adobe Illustrator) and basic design principles to
prepare graphic materials. Students will design illustrations for print, web, devices, and distribution, developing technical skill and design sensibility in creating object-oriented graphics
through line and node editing using vector graphic software (Adobe Illustrator.)Students will
analyze professional illustration, research trending topics, understand output consequences
including color management, file size efficiency. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
TCOM-410 
Technical Information Design
Intensive practice in the creation of content for online and multimedia documents with emphasis on the presentation of technical and scientific concepts, products, and processes. A survey
of graphic methods for the display of complex technical relationships and ideas. Students will
also explore contemporary topics (international technical communication, the future of on-line
documentation, ethical considerations in technical information design, etc.) and applications
(legal, medical, electronics, environmental, etc.) in Technical Information Design. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
TCOM-414 
Proposal Writing
Proposal Writing focuses on the elements of proposal responses and practicing creating those
elements. Students learn the process of evaluating and responding to RFIs and RFPs with
concentration on making bid decisions, organizing teams, identifying strategies, establishing
credibility, ensuring technical clarity, and writing persuasively. Topics include the proposal
process that is practiced by government, industry, and grant-funding agencies. Co-listed with
TCOM 621. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

139

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

National Technical Institute for the Deaf
Index
INTP	
NACC	
NAST	
ASLC	
NASL	
NACA	
NACT	
NETS	
NCAR	
NCOM	
NCIM	
NCAD	
NENG	
NAIS	
NBUS	
NGRD	
NGRP	
NHSS	
NLST	
NDLS	
NMTH	
NSCI	

ASL-English Interpretation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Accounting Technology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Administrative Support Technology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
American Sign Language-Evening Courses.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
American Sign Language. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Applied Computer Technology-AS degree.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Applied Computer Technology-Technical Computing .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Applied Mechanical Technology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Career Development. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Communication Studies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Computer Integrated Machining Technology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Computer-Aided Drafting Technology .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
English (NTID).  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
General Arts and Imaging.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
General Business .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Graphic Design Concentration. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Graphic Production Concentration. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Humanities and Social Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Laboratory Science Technology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Liberal Studies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Mathematics (NTID) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Science (NTID). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

140
145
145
140
142
152
152
147
146
146
148
147
149
142
146
143
144
150
153
154
154
155

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

American Sign Language & Interpreting Education
American Sign Language-Evening Courses
ASLC-211 
Introduction to American Sign Language and Deaf Culture I
Students are introduced to approximately 300 basic conversational signs and linguistic features
needed to engage in survival-level conversations with Deaf people. Fingerspelling and background information on Deaf culture and community are included. Each class period will have
small group, large group and pair interactions. Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
ASLC-212 
Introduction to American Sign Language and Deaf Culture II
This course continues the development of American Sign Language skills for students who
have successfully completed Introduction to American Sign Language and Deaf Culture I. The
course focuses on ASL vocabulary, linguistic features, and cultural protocols to enable students
to function in survival level ASL conversations with a focus on work-related and social communication. Students learn to talk about when activities occur, make requests, and discuss
weather conditions, daily routines, and health. (Prerequisites: ASLC-211 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)
ASLC-289 
Special Topics: American Sign Language and Deaf Culture
The description for the special topics course will be specified in each course proposal. Lecture,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

ASL-English Interpretation
INTP-120 
American Sign Language I
ASL I includes linguistic features, cultural protocols and core vocabulary for students to function in basic ASL conversations that include ASL grammar for asking and answering questions
while introducing oneself, exchanging personal information, talking about family, friends
and surroundings, and discussing activities. This course is designed for students who have
no knowledge of American Sign Language. To progress to the next ASL course in the series
(INTP-125), students must complete the course with a minimum grade of C. (ASLINT-BS)
Lab 5, Lecture, Credits 4 (Fall)

140	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

INTP-125 
American Sign Language II
This course expands the basic principles presented in ASL I. ASL II teaches students to use
linguistics features, cultural protocols and core vocabulary to function in basic ASL conversations that include ASL grammar for giving directions, describing, making request, talking
about family, occupations and routines, and attributing qualities to others. To progress to the
next course in the series (INTP-126), students must complete the course with a minimum grade
of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-120 or equivalent course with a minimum grade of C- and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 4 (Fall)
INTP-126 
American Sign Language III
This course builds upon information taught in ASL I-II and introduces expanded grammatical features of ASL and specialized vocabulary, while continuing to increase fingerspelling and
numbers receptive and expressive skills. In addition, some basic features of ASL discourse are
taught in organizing and explaining contextual information. To progress to the next course
in the series (INTP-225), students must complete the course with a minimum grade of C.
(Prerequisites: INTP-125 or equivalent course with a minimum grade of C- and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 4 (Spring)
INTP-200 
Deaf Expressions
Students will explore the historical, philosophical, linguistic, social, cultural, educational, medical and artistic past, present, and future of deaf/Deaf/hard-of-hearing people. This course uses
an on-line format to discuss concepts and perspectives found in the assigned book(s) and visual
media (e.g. film, television programs, etc,). Each time the course is offered the book and visual
media will be different so students may take this course multiple times. Books/media will be
chosen from areas with relevance to Deaf Culture and community, such as D/deaf literature
and the Arts, D/deaf history, D/deaf issues, significant D/deaf people, and ASL. This course is
repeatable for credit. (ASLINT-BS) Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
INTP-210 
Introduction to the Field of Interpreting
This survey course is the introduction to the profession of sign language interpreting, with a
focus on the role, function, and responsibilities of an interpreter. Information about the history
of the profession, professional organizations, and settings where interpreters work is presented.
Additional topics include the function of assessing as part of the interpreting process, with a
focus on Demand/Control Schema. To progress to INTP-220 students must complete course
with a minimum grade of C. (ASLINT-BS) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-215 
Processing Skills Development
This course is an introduction to the mental processing skills (pre-interpreting skills) of consecutive and simultaneous interpretation. This course includes an overview of the theoretical
models of interpretation, provides skill development activities for isolated interpreting subtasks and practice activities for the integration of these tasks in translation and consecutive
interpreting activities. Course content includes interpreting theory, message analysis, text
analysis, visualization, listening and comprehension, shadowing, paraphrasing, dual task training, text analysis. To progress to (INTP-310) students must complete the course with a grade
of C or better. (Prerequisite: INTP-126 or equivalent course with a minimum grade of C- and
undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-225 
American Sign Language IV
This course builds upon information taught in ASL I-III. Students continue learning and using
ASL vocabulary, grammatical principles and various intermediate-level discourse features in
narratives and presentations in ASL. Students analyze multiple meaning English words and
English idioms to express concepts in ASL. Issues related to Deaf culture continue to be introduced based on unit topics. To progress to the next courses in the series (INTP-215, INTP-220
and INTP-226), students must complete the course with a minimum grade of C. (Prerequisites:
INTP-126 or equivalent course with a minimum grade of C- and undergraduate standing in
ASLINT-BS.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-226 
American Sign Language V
This course builds upon information taught in ASL VI. Students continue learning and using
ASL vocabulary, grammatical principles and various intermediate-level discourse features in
narratives and presentations in ASL. Students continue to analyze multiple meaning English
words and English idioms to express concepts in ASL. Issues related to Deaf culture continue
to be introduced based on unit topics. To progress to the next courses in the series (INTP-325
and INTP-310), students must complete the course with a minimum grade of C). (Prerequisites:
INTP-225 or equivalent course with a minimum grade of C and undergraduate standing in
ASLINT-BS.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

INTP-310 
Interpreting I
This course introduces the English to ASL and ASL to English interpreting process with a focus
on text analysis and consecutive production of an equivalent message in the target language.
Compression and expansion strategies are introduced. Students develop interpreting management strategies and diagnostic assessment skills. Students will interpret inquiry and narrative
texts in monologue and dialogue formats. Warm-up exercises will be performed as part of
the self-care regimen recommended for sign language interpreters. To progress to INTP-335
Interpreting II: English to ASL and INTP-336 Interpreting II: ASL to English, students must
complete this course with a minimum grade of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-215 with a minimum
grade of C- and (INTP-226 or 0875-303 with a minimum grade of C) or equivalent course and
undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-315 
Practical and Ethical Applications
This course presents the underlying principles of the Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Code
of Professional Conduct and applies the Code to the various situations and settings. Students
will explore how professional interpreters apply these principles in their daily work and how
consumers perceive the ethical role and function of interpreters. In addition, etiquette and
protocol for each setting will be discussed. Settings include: K-12, post-secondary, religious,
healthcare, mental health, deaf-blind, performing arts, and business and industry. To progress
to INTP-350 Practicum and Seminar I, students must complete course with a minimum grade
of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-210 or equivalent course and undergraduate standing in ASLINTBS.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-325 
American Sign Language VI
This course builds upon information taught in ASL I-V. Students continue learning and using
ASL vocabulary, grammatical principles and various advanced-level discourse features in narratives and presentations in ASL. Students analyze different components in storytelling. ASL
Literature will be introduced in this level. Students identify controversial issues in various
works of ASL Literature. To progress to the next courses in the series (INTP-326, INTP-335
and INTP-336) students must complete courses with minimum grades of C. (Prerequisites:
INTP-226 or 0875-303 or equivalent course with a minimum grade of C- and undergraduate
standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-326 
American Sign Language VII
This course builds upon information taught in ASL I-VI. This is the last series of ASL courses.
Students continue learning and using ASL vocabulary, grammatical principles and various
advanced-level discourse features in debate and public speaking in ASL. Students analyze
different components in debate and public speaking. Students identify and discuss various
controversial issues via debate and presentation. To progress to next courses in the sequence
(INTP-435 and INTP-436) students must complete course with a minimum grade of C.
(ASLINT-BS) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-335 
Interpreting II: English to ASL
Students develop the ability to produce an equivalent simultaneous ASL message from a spoken
English source message. This course integrates inquiry and expository texts in both dialogic
and monologic formats. Specific discipline areas include healthcare, employment and finance.
Students will continue to develop text analysis skills applying them to simultaneous interpreting. Biomechanics and self-care issues will be discussed. To progress to the next courses in the
sequence (INTP-350 and INTP-435) students must complete courses with a minimum grade
of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-325 with a with a minimum grade of C- and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-336 
Interpreting II: ASL to English
Students will develop the ability to produce an equivalent English message from ASL source
messages. This course integrates inquiry and expository texts in both dialogic and monologic
formats. Specific content areas include healthcare, employment and finances. Students continue to develop text analysis skills, applying them to simultaneous interpreting. To progress
to the next courses in the sequence (INTP-350 and INTP-436 ) students must complete courses
with minimum grades of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-325 with a with a minimum grade of C- and
undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-355 
Introduction to Working with the Deaf Blind Community
This course is an introduction to various perspectives of the Deaf-Blind community. The focus
of the course will be on the variety of communication modes and cultural norms that are discovered within the Deaf-Blind community. Students will be able to develop an understanding
of the role/function of a Support Service Provider through hands-on experience and interaction
with Deaf-Blind individuals. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to at least 3rd year standing
in ASLINT-BS or NTID supported students and INTP-226 or MLAS-401 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

INTP-360 
Introduction to K-12 Interpreting
This course includes an overview of the history and current status of educational interpreting
throughout the United States. Content includes the role, practices, and skills of educational interpreters in K-12 settings; communication systems; pertinent laws and regulations;
resources, information, and strategies for consumer awareness and education; administrative
practices and personnel structure of school systems; assessment and management of educational interpreters; and topics that concern educational interpreters. (ASLINT-BS YR 3 or 4)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-361 
Educational Interpreting: Elementary Settings
This course is designed to prepare students to interpret in elementary school settings. Content
will include an orientation to activities, elementary level content, sign vocabulary, language
development, psycho-social development, and interpreting issues that are pertinent to elementary students. The course addresses strategies for interpreting classroom discourse and
various content areas. Vocabulary for various elementary content areas will be introduced.
Students will simultaneously interpret English-to-ASL and ASL-to-English, elementary-level
texts. (Prerequisites: INTP-310 and INTP-360 or equivalent course and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-362 
Educational Interpreting: Middle/Secondary Settings
This course is designed to prepare students to interpret in middle and secondary school settings. Content will include orientation to the activities, middle/secondary school curriculum,
sign vocabulary, language development, psycho-social development and issues pertinent to
middle and secondary school students. The course also includes information about teaching
methodologies and strategies for interpreting classroom discourse and various content areas.
Students will learn how to prepare the middle/secondary students to request and work with
interpreters. Vocabulary for various middle and secondary school content areas will be introduced. Students will also learn about interpreting for foreign language courses. Students will
simultaneously interpret English-to-ASL and ASL-to-English, middle and secondary level texts.
(Prerequisites: INTP-310 and INTP-360 or equivalent course and undergraduate standing in
ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-363 
Educational Interpreting: Post Secondary Settings
This course prepares students to interpret in the post-secondary setting. Students will learn
preparation strategies for English-to-ASL and ASL-to-English interpreting for the following
topics: computer science, advanced science and mathematics, selected liberal arts, physical
education, and the instruction of a foreign language. In addition, students will become familiar with current issues facing interpreters in post-secondary settings. As part of this course,
students will observe interpreters working in several types of college classrooms, (e.g. lectures, seminars, labs, and studios). (Prerequisites: (INTP-435 and INTP-436) or 0875-400 or
equivalent course and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-399 
Independent Study: ASL-English Interpretation
The description for each independent study request will be specified in each student proposal.
(ASLINT-BS) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
INTP-435 
Interpreting III: English to ASL
In this course students advance their skills in simultaneously producing equivalent ASL messages from spoken English source messages. Monologic, expository texts on specific topic areas
will be the focus of this course. The bulk of the interpretation work in this course will take place
utilizing actual speakers and audience members. Students will continue to develop their English
vocabulary, ASL vocabulary, interpreting analysis skills, develop team interpreting skills and
increase stamina. To progress to the next course in the sequence (INTP-450) students must
complete course with a minimum grade of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-335 or equivalent course
and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-436 
Interpreting III: ASL to English
In this course students advance their skills in simultaneously producing equivalent spoken
English messages from ASL source messages. Monologic, expository texts on specific topic
areas will be the focus of this course. Students will continue to develop their English vocabulary, ASL vocabulary, interpreting analysis skills, develop team interpreting skills and increase
stamina. To progress to the next course in the sequence (INTP-450) students must complete
course with a minimum grade of C. (Prerequisites: INTP-336 or equivalent course and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-440 
Interpreting IV:Adapting to Diverse Consumers
This course introduces the skill of transliterating simultaneously from a spoken English message into an equivalent signed message incorporating an appropriate combination of ASL and
English features. The focus of the course will be the analysis of the macro- and microstructures of the source language and the production of a target language this is sensitive to contact
language situations. Topics include language variation within the deaf community, role and
function of a designated interpreter, the features and process of transliteration and transliteration skill development including work with frozen texts. (Prerequisites: (INTP-435 and
INTP-436) or 0875-400 or equivalent course and undergraduate standing in ASLINT-BS.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

141

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

INTP-441 
Healthcare Interpreting
This course is designed to introduce students to sign language interpreting in healthcare settings through the analytical construct of Demand-Control Schema for interpreting work. The
course content includes medical terminology in English and ASL. Students will learn tools
and techniques to utilize while interpreting in healthcare environments with an emphasis on
interactive learning including direct exposure to healthcare settings, deaf and hard-of-hearing healthcare professionals and professional healthcare interpreters. (ASLINT-BS YR 3 or 4)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
INTP-451 
Mental Health Interpreting
This course is designed to introduce students to the field of mental health interpreting. Students
will become familiar with the DSM-IV and common types of mental illness as well as psychiatric terminology in both English and ASL. Students will examine the role, function, ethics,
and challenges of interpreting in mental health settings through the analytical construct of
Demand-Control Schema for interpreting work. Students will also learn tools and techniques
to utilize while interpreting in psychiatric environments and will have opportunities to interact with mental health professionals. (ASLINT-BS YR 3 or 4) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-460 
Issues in Interpreting
This course offers students an opportunity to integrate content areas in the curriculum through
the examination and discussion of issues in the field of interpreting. While the course content
and focus will vary depending on current issues and student interest, it will direct attention
toward an important issue facing the interpreting profession and will provide an advanced
experience of problem solving and value clarification. Students will develop and demonstrate
their ability to define a research topic, gather and evaluate scholarly evidence, and present
their findings in a paper and presentation. (Prerequisites: Student standing in ASLINT-BS is
required.Co-requisite: INTP-435 and INTP-436.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-461 
Introduction to Legal Interpreting
This course will introduce students to the field of legal interpreting. Students will learn about
the legal and judicial systems while examining the role, function, ethics, safeguards and challenges of interpreting in legal and courtroom settings. Students will employ a multidisciplinary
approach to learning about legal interpreting through legal research and writing, observation,
guest lecturers and interpreting practice. (ASLINT-BS YR 3 or 4) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3
(Spring)
INTP-471 
Introduction to Cued Speech Transliterating
This course is an introduction to the Cued Speech system of representing spoken English,
its history, and application. Students will increase their awareness of spoken English and the
pronunciation of words in conversation. They will also understand and describe the purpose
of Cued Speech, why parents choose this system for their child who is deaf as well as identify
other populations and uses for Cued Speech. Students will understand the language learning
benefits of Cued Speech. Upon completion of the course students will be able to accurately cue
spoken English. (3rd year status in the program) Class 3, Credit 3 (S) (ASLINT-BS YR 3 or 4)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
INTP-481 
Community Interpreting
This course will address the evolution of professionalization within the field of interpreting, as
well as explore various aspects of working in the community and the dynamics surrounding
community involvement. This course is highly interactive, highlighting a variety of guest presenter and panelists from the Rochester community. Topics of discussion are: working with
Deaf professionals, working with Deaf interpreters, business practices, professional supervision and Video Relay Service (VRS) settings. Within these major topics, discussion will include
discretionary practices, ethical decision-making, current standards and community connections and resources. The objective is to guide students in traversing the dialectic, rather than
eliciting right or wrong answers that simply reflect the rhetoric of the interpreting field. (3rd
or 4th year status in Program). (ASLINT-BS YR 3 or 4) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
INTP-489 
Special Topics: ASL-English Interpretation
The description for the special topics course will be specified in each course proposal. Lecture,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

American Sign Language
NASL-190 
American Sign Language I
This course is designed for deaf and hard-of-hearing students who have no previous knowledge of American Sign Language. ASL I includes core vocabulary, the grammatical features,
and Deaf cultural protocols for students to function in basic ASL conversations that include
ASL grammar for asking and answering questions while introducing oneself; exchanging personal information; telling where they are from and living; talking about family, friends; class
schedules and routines, discussing college related topics; giving directions, and describing surroundings. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

142	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NASL-199 
Independent Study: American Sign Language
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
NASL-200 
American Sign Language II
This course is designed for deaf and hard-of-hearing students who have completed ASL I (or
the equivalent) and can participate in a basic conversation in American Sign Language. ASL
II includes the linguistic features, Deaf cultural protocols and core vocabulary for students to
function in ASL conversations that include ASL grammar for asking and answering questions
and relaying short narratives while describing people and objects; attributing qualities to others;
discussing hobbies; explaining procedures; spending money; discussing weather; and discussing important life events. Classroom and homework activities include practicing conversations,
learning about Deaf Culture and Deaf Community., working with DVDs, viewing sign language
on film, and being filmed. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NASL-190 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NASL-230 
Beginning Mexican Sign Language
This course will offer a beginning level o Mexican Sign Language "Lengua de Senas Mexicana"
(LSN). Students are required to have at least intermediate level of ASL skills. In this course, students will learn basic vocabulary, alphabet, numbers, and grammatical aspects of LSM, which
they will compare with those of ASL. In addition, they will learn about Mexican culture, traditions, norms, and values along with Mexican deaf culture and compare those with the general
U.S. culture and Deaf culture in the United States. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to at
least 3rd year standing in ASLINT-BS or NTID supported students and INTP-226 or MLAS401 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NASL-240 
Beginning Russian Sign Language
This course will offer a beginning level of Russian Sign Language (RSL). Students are required
to have at least intermediate level of ASL skills. In this course, students will learn basic vocabulary, alphabet, numbers, and grammatical aspects of RSL, which they will compare with those
of ASL. In addition, they will learn about Russian culture, traditions, norms, and values along
with Russian deaf culture and compare those with the general U.S. culture and Deaf culture of
the United States. Students will also learn how to write some basic words in Russian language.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to at least 3rd year standing in ASLINT-BS or NTID supported students and INTP-226 or MLAS-301 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NASL-275 
Structure of American Sign Language
This course provides students with basic knowledge about the linguistic structure of American
Sign Language (ASL). Through an introduction to language features, students will examine
the phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics and discourse of ASL. Information regarding historical and cultural aspects of ASL is also introduced and discussed. (NTID Supported
Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NASL-280 
Strategies for Teaching Basic American Sign Language
This course provides an overview of how second languages have traditionally been taught, what
the current methods and theories are, and their applications to the teaching of American Sign
Language. Students are provided opportunities to practice basic teaching techniques, selection
of appropriate materials, design lesson plans, and use of evaluation techniques, current technology, including how to teach Deaf culture and ASL grammatical features in lessons. Students
learn about resources to support their efforts to teach American Sign Language. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NASL-275 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NASL-289 
Special Topics: American Sign Language
(NTID Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

Arts and Imaging Studies
General Arts and Imaging
NAIS-130 
Raster and Vector Graphics
This course introduces students to the skills needed for the successful production and manipulation of raster and vector images using image creation and production software. Students will
work in bitmap and vector applications, producing and editing with the tools and techniques
offered by the software programs such as selection techniques, basic layer controls, digital
masking, image correction and enhancement. Additional topics will include the relevance
of image size, resolution and file format specifications when working with raster and vector
images. Comprehension and correct usage of terminology and concepts are emphasized. (NTID
Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NAIS-140 
Graphic Design and Typography I
Students will learn how to work through steps of the graphic design process, starting with
the identification and research of design problems, and the intended message and the target
audience, to development of basic graphic design solutions presented visually through clear,
well-executed layouts created by both traditional and electronic means. Fundamental graphic
design and typographic principles, elements, techniques and vocabulary used in design problem solving will be introduced. Students in this course will also learn about areas/categories of
graphic design, creating examples such as posters, book/CD covers and logos. Topics covering
selecting appropriate printing papers, professional practices, psychology of color, and critique
methods will also be introduced. (Prerequisites: Restricted to NTID supported students that
have completed NAIS-120 and (NAIS-130 or (0855-251 and 0855-252)) or equivalent courses.)
Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAIS-150 
Page Layout I
Students will use page layout (desktop publishing) applications to design and produce pages
and documents to given specifications. Skill development will include importing and placing text and graphic files, the application of style sheets, templates, snippets, libraries, and
color specifications. The application of design and typographic principles, industry terminology, measurement systems, font management, and file management are also covered. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAIS-160 
Web Design I
This course introduces students to the fundamental skills needed to create designs that work
on the World Wide Web. Students are introduced to the Internet, learn basic HTML programming for graphics, and legal issues of the Internet. Text based technology is used to separate
design from content using templates and cascading style sheets (CSS). Topics such as image
preparation, page design, site graphic design, navigation & linking, content, usability, speed,
originality and audience are discussed. Students are expected to create web pages that demonstrate their understanding and use of basic application of the above topics. (NTID Supported
Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAIS-199 
Independent Study-Visual Communications Studies
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each student proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAIS-201 
Employment Seminar
Provides students with an opportunity to prepare for co-op and permanent employment
through activities including developing and revising resumes, cover letters and portfolios, completing forms, interviewing, developing strategies for finding job opportunities, and researching
targeted companies. Discussions relating to personal finance, communication strategies, adapting to the workplace, tips for job success, and workplace expectations will be included. (This
course is restricted to 2nd year students in the ARTIMG-AAS or ARTIMG-AOS program.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAIS-289 
Special Topics-Visual Communications Studies
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 5 (Fall, Spring)
NAIS-299 
Co-op Visual Communications Studies
This course provides a ten-week (350 hours) work experience in the field. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

Graphic Design Concentration
NGRD-111 
Drawing I
This course is an introduction to freehand drawing of basic forms, with an emphasis on perspective, including one-point and two-point techniques, still life studies and figure drawing.
Drawing principles, materials and techniques will be introduced. Still life study will be applied
using perspective concepts, and composition, including tonal values and textures. Figure drawing will be focused on the study of line, gesture, contour, construction, proportion and tonal
values. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NGRD-115 
Visual Idea Development
This course gives students the opportunity to see themselves, their experiences and their environment as sources of creativity, through a variety of activities which will include classroom
discussions; videos of artists; visiting a gallery; keeping documented written and illustrated
journals, sketchbooks; and working with a team to do a project. Students learn strategies for
developing concepts and organization of thought processes as well as systems to formulate solutions to design problems. The library is used for development of research skills for written and
visual content. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

NGRD-211 
Drawing II
This course continues the principles and skills developed in Drawing I, with special emphasis on the human form, including proportion, shading, light and dark, head/facial features,
sustained study, and the use of figure within a composition. This course extends the various
applications learned in the previous drawing and applies them to still life, drapery studies, and
the human form within various environments. The use of the sketchbook will be emphasized
for development of composition skills; students will use the library and other resources and
will further explore various kinds of drawing materials. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to NTID supported students that have completed NGRD-111 or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRD-221 
History of Graphic Design
This course includes the study of a survey of art and design movements, designers, and typographers who have made significant contributions to the field of Graphic Design. (NTID Supported
Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRD-230 
Digital Illustration
This course will provide students with skills and techniques used in areas of digital illustration,
including comparison of techniques and functions of vector and bitmap software programs to
create professional-quality renderings. Various kinds of illustration will be introduced, including editorial, book, and information illustration (illustrated charts and graphs). Students will
have the opportunity to create professional quality illustrations for various audiences and
media. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed
NAIS-140 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRD-240 
Graphic Design and Typography II
Students will practice working through steps of the graphic design process learned in Graphic
Design and Typography I to develop more complex design solutions presented visually through
clear, well executed layouts created by both traditional and electronic means. More advanced
design and typography principles will be discussed. Students in this course will learn about and
will create examples of various areas/categories of graphic design, including corporate graphic
design, information design, advertising design, editorial design and packaging design. Topics
such as using creative briefs, folding/finishing/binding methods, professional graphic design
business practices and self-promotion will also be covered. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NAIS-140 and NAIS-150 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRD-255 
Publication Design
In this course, focus will be placed on design of multi-paged printed graphics including brochures, booklets, catalogs, menus and editorial designs using grids to organize information.
Issues such as page sequencing and pagination, readability, design flow, consistency and preparing documents to meet industry standards will be addressed. Assignments will be completed
using page layout software consistent with industry standards. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NGRD-240 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRD-256 
Identity Design
In this course, students will learn about various classifications and areas of identity design and
will develop identity symbols and systems of identification and branding for businesses and
organizations as well as individuals, including components such as business cards, letterheads,
envelopes and invoices. Focus will be on identifying client need, budget and target audience in
order to develop appropriate identity design solutions with components that are compatible,
consistent, and practical to use. In addition, students will be familiarized with current brand
identification system designers and current design trends in identity design. Students are
expected to find a real client for at least one of the assignments for this course. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NGRD-240 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRD-257 Animation
In this course, students will learn how to create illustrations, create animation, and develop
animated elements for web-based and stand-alone interactive media. Course content includes
concepts of staging, timelines, frame rates, keyframes, transitions, and object attributes. Writing
and storyboarding for animation will be addressed. Both vector and raster animation applications will be used. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have
completed (NAIS-120 or (0855-255 and 0855-314) and (NGRD-111 or 0855-311) and (NAIS130 or (0855-251 and 0855-252)) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

143

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NGRD-258 Cartooning
In this course, students will learn how to create cartoons, apply storytelling techniques to
develop sequential graphic narratives, and develop multi page, multi-strip, or single panel cartoons. Course content includes understanding the history of cartooning, drawing techniques
(both traditional and digital methods), character creation and development, story writing, plot
breakdowns, panel to panel sequencing, cartooning, and creating final output in the form of a
printed comic book or a online web comic. Writing and breakdowns for cartooning will also
be taught. Drawing techniques and software applications are taught and used in the course.
(NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3

Graphic Production Concentration
NGRP-110 
Digital Photography I
This course gives students an introduction to the tools, techniques and terminology of digital
photographic imaging through a series of hands-on activities that will permit each student to
investigate the applications of digital photography. Students will be expected to capture images
using digital cameras, process digital images using the appropriate software, create quality picture files and prints, and participate in project-related critiques. (NTID Supported Students)
Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NGRP-210 
Digital Photography II
Aesthetic/composition considerations will be emphasized. Various genres and markets will
be discussed such as photo journalism, portraiture, fine art, advertising and marketing, sports
and still life. This course will also address various technologies for the capturing and converting of multiple static images into more dynamic presentations of environments, and objects.
Topics will include panoramic stitching, creating virtual tours, creating 360 degree views of 3D
objects, and creating dynamic slide shows. Students will be taught basic techniques for studio
lighting and will be asked to produce photographs to match an art director sketch or layout.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NGRP110 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRP-220 Videography
This course provides an overview of videography for the web. This is a basic digital video course
that introduces the process and procedures involved in digital video production from start to
finish. Students will be introduced to videography production techniques, camera operation
and formats, digital non-linear editing, titling and lighting for video. Emphasis is on development of ideas, proper operation of video and computer equipment for productions and
post-production of digital non-linear edited sequences and their adaptation to different presentation formats for online delivery. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRP-231 
Image Preparation
Students will build on the skills previously learned in Raster and Vector Graphics. This course
includes specialized image preparation techniques used to acquire, optimize, correct, reconstruct, restore, and enhance images for placement in print and digital media layouts. Topics
include: determining and applying resolution and magnification settings appropriate to the
characteristics of the specified purpose of an image, setting highlight and shadow points,
removing color cast, sharpening, and tone-adjustment of acquired images; the use of desktop scanners hardware/software; the use of appropriate color settings/modes and file formats.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed (NAIS130 or (0855-251 and 0855-252)) and NAIS-150 and NAIS-160 or equivalent courses.) Lab,
Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRP-232 
Image Manipulation
This course emphasizes the procedures and skill development required for the efficient and
effective manipulation and compositing of digital images in a production environment building
on the skills previously learned in Raster and Vector Graphics. This is a production-oriented course with a focus on the non-destructive editing of (primarily raster) digital images.
This course includes specialized image manipulation methods such as advanced selection and
masking techniques for producing images that blend together into a single composite image.
Additional topics include applying production planning techniques to image manipulation,
production quality standards, advanced methods and quality criteria for image manipulation, and legal and ethical issues. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported
students that have completed NAIS-130 or (0855-251 and 0855-252) or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRP-245 
Color Theory and Management
This course includes the study and management of color for design, printing, Web, and photographic imaging systems and procedures. Students will use and apply correct technical
vocabulary, and various concepts and procedures related to the perception, specification, evaluation, correction, and management of color in various graphic arts. (Prerequisites: Restricted
to NTID supported students that have completed NAIS-120 and (NAIS-130 or (0855-251 and
0855-252)) or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall)

144	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NGRP-250 
Page Layout II
This course builds on topics presented in Page Layout I. Students will define and apply techniques and procedures for optimizing document design and production efficiency. Topics
include defining paragraph, character, and object styles; making and using templates; saving
and accessing object snippets and libraries; accessing and using database information to create
documents, recognizing and applying proofreaders marks and notations; defining and applying advanced typographic techniques, advanced page layout procedures, object transparency
and other image effects; building and editing tables; and, defining and applying color specifications and effects; and using document output procedures. Students will continue to develop
knowledge and skills in the industry leading page layout software applications. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NAIS-150 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRP-251 
Publication Production
The students will study the use of page layout applications to produce book, magazine, and
long format publications. Topics include techniques for specifying and applying publication
templates; font management and selection; page formats; page and section numbering; headers and footers; text editing; graphics creation, preparation, and placement; color specification
and usage; automating a table of contents; using a colophon and other features typical for book
and long document publishing formats.? Students are introduced to the repurposing of documents for interactive digital media and XML-based document production. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NGRP-250 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRP-252 
PDF Production and Workflow
The students will study the Portable Document Format (PDF) file format including defining
and applying specifications for color management, file optimization and file security; recognizing and editing PDF documents; and using PDF files in a variety of print and non-print media
production workflows. Topics include procedures for making PDF files, and adding interactive
features including bookmarks, action button, hyperlinks to internal anchors, and hyperlinks
to other documents and Web content. Emphasis is given to file optimization for interactive
display size formats, color, and resolution. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed (NAIS-130 or (0855-251 and 0855-252)) and NAIS-150
or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRP-260 
Web Design II
This course provides an overview of designing multi-page web sites and being sure they are
accessible to audiences with special needs. Students will continue to learn how to use website
concepts and design elements learned in Web Design I to successfully to create a multi-page web
site. Effective use of color, typography, and design will be applied to website design. Students
will continue the study and application of Web design concepts, site navigation, interactivity,
and the management of a multi-page web site. Students will develop a web site that combines
the advantages of text-based production techniques and graphics-based design with content
management systems, with a focus on usability and accessibility. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NAIS-160 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NGRP-270 
Specialty Graphics Imaging
This course provides students with a unique set of knowledge and skills required for the preparation, production, finishing, material handling, mounting and displaying of wide format
products. Students will study procedures used to create products that include large display
signage and decals, vehicle wraps, packaging mock-ups, point-of-purchase display elements,
vinyl appliqué, magnetic and tieback signage, and large-scale presentation displays, and other large-scale signage. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that
have completed (NAIS-130 or (0855-251 and 0855-252)) and NAIS-140 and NGRP-110 and
NGRP-231 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NGRP-275 
Digital Printing Systems
This course will focus on the operating features of the black & white and color digital production printing systems. Students will learn the job and market capability of the various systems,
xerography concepts in monochrome printing, image and paper quality considerations, creation of electronic files and file transfer, and operating procedures. Additional topics include
the digital workflow for on-demand book printing and small-format binding. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed (NAIS-130 or (0855251 and 0855-252)) and NAIS-150 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

Business Studies
Accounting Technology
NACC-130 
Personal Finance
This course provides students with information and resources needed to understand the creation and implementation of a budget, use of credit and borrowing money responsibly, financial
rights and ways to safeguard their money, and factors used to determine their readiness to buy
a home or make other major purchases. Information on financial institutions such as banks,
credit unions, and savings and loan organizations will also be covered. This course will provide students with basic financial literacy so they can develop sound financial management of
their personal income as well as an understanding of the economic events that can influence
their financial well being and society as a whole. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACC-201 
Accounting 1
Introduction to accounting principles for both accounting and nonaccounting students. Both
service and merchandising (retail/wholesale) businesses are introduced. Areas covered include:
analyzing and recording of business transactions using the double-entry accounting system;
end-of-period adjustments; worksheet; financial statements; closing entries; and post-closing
trial balance. Students complete a comprehensive "accounting cycle" project. Computerized
spreadsheet applications are required. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NAST-160 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
NACC-202 
Accounting 2
This course is a continuation from Accounting 1. Topics covered include: accounting principles
and procedures related to notes payable and receivable, the valuation of receivables, inventories, fixed assets, partnerships, capital stock, retained earnings, taxes, dividends, bonds, the
statement of cash flow, and the analysis of financial statements. A comprehensive capstone
project is completed. Computerized spreadsheet applications are required. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACC-201 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACC-203 
Accounting 3
Cost accounting is the focus of this course. Coverage includes manufacturing statements, cost
theory, integration of materials, labor and overhead, average and FIFO process costing methods,
equivalent units, multiple products, changes in units, budgeting, cost classification and computerized applications. Students complete a comprehensive project. Computerized spreadsheet
applications are required. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NACC-202 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACC-204 
Accounting Capstone
This capstone experience gives students an opportunity to reinforce and apply accounting
skills previously studied. Students will apply skills using a variety of approaches including case
studies, simulations, projects, teamwork, and presentations. Students will research, review and
interpret financial data and its impact on managerial decisions. The course will also discuss
the workplace as it relates to communication, interpersonal skills, decision-making, ethics and
lifelong learning skills in a professional accounting environment. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACC-203 or equivalent course.)
Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACC-205 
Financial Accounting
Introduction to accounting principles for both accounting and non-accounting students. Both
service and merchandising (retail/wholesale) businesses are introduced. Areas covered include:
analyzing and recording of business transactions using the double-entry accounting system;
adjusting and closing entries and financial statement preparation. Generally accepted accounting principles, accounting ethics and analytical tools help students become informed users of
financial statements. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACC-206 
Managerial Accounting
Introduction to the use of cost accounting information by managers within a business. This
course includes development of manufacturing statements, cost theory, integration of materials, labor and overhead, job order and process costing, flexible budgeting and evaluating the
performance of managers and divisions through variance analysis. (Prerequisites: This class
is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACC-205 or equivalent.) Lab,
Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACC-289 
Special Topics: Accounting Technology/Business Technology
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

NACC-299 
Co-op: Accounting Technology/Business Technology
Designed to give the student an opportunity to gain work experience, to apply what has been
learned and to self-evaluate personal and communication skills. Placement assistance is provided to help the student find a job related to his/her field of study. One co-op experience is
required for graduation. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Administrative Support Technology
NAST-140 
Essential Document Production
This course is for students with little or no knowledge of word processing software, limited
keyboarding experience, and those that have a minimum of 20 net words per minute. Emphasis
is on keyboarding skill development as well as an introduction to basic word processing skills.
Students key and format business correspondence, reports, and tables. The expectation is to
exit this course with a 30 net words per minute typing proficiency for five minutes. (NTID
Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-150 
Advanced Document Production
This course focuses on effective management of document production activities by selecting
an appropriate format or template, applying graphic enhancements as needed, and saving the
document in an appropriate business format. Business correspondence, newsletters, tables,
forms and reports will be produced using word processing software. Emphasis is on the mastery of basic skills and their application to a variety of realistic office document production
projects. Typing skill development continues with an expected exit speed to 40+ net words
per minute for five minutes. (Prerequisite: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NAST-140 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-160 
Spreadsheet Applications for Business
Emphasis will be on creating, formatting, and enhancing worksheets; creating and applying
formulas and functions; building and formatting charts; using What-If analysis and creating
templates. Upon completion, students will be able to design and enhance basic spreadsheets.
(NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-215 
Integrated Document Production
The course further develops student skills in integrated document formatting and applications
using various types of word processing, spreadsheets, databases, slide presentations, and electronic office procedures. Through business simulations, students will have an opportunity to
incorporate their speed/accuracy and production skills with communication, information and
file management skills. The expectation is to exit this course with a 50 net words per minute
proficiency for a five-minute timing. (Prerequisite: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NAST-150 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
NAST-220 
Database Applications for Business
This course introduces the fundamental concepts of a database management system for creating, maintaining, manipulating, retrieving, and printing business data. Students will learn
to create various forms and design reports for storing and displaying data. In addition, the
student will create switchboard systems and allow users to view data in multiple dimensions.
Students will also learn to save database objects in HTML format so they can be viewed by a
browser and imported or exported in XML format. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture
4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-225 
Business Graphics
This course provides students with a basic knowledge of business graphics on a windows platform. Students will be introduced to basic design principles and develop the ability to choose,
modify and effectively use appropriate graphics for a variety of business communication formats. Students will be required to produce an e-portfolio to document the skills learned in the
AST program. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have
completed NAST-215 or (0804-291 and 0804-302) or or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-230 
Desktop Publishing for Business
This course focuses on conceptual and technical approaches to desktop publishing and graphic
design as applied to business communications. Emphasis is placed on the use of design principles related to color, space, text and images in preparation of digital design layouts. Students
will be required to enhance their AST e-portfolio using desktop publishing and web design
skills acquired in this course. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NAST-225 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

145

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NAST-240 
Administrative Support Technology Seminar
This course provides students with an opportunity to prepare for employment through a formal mentoring experience, team presentation, and guest presentations. Topics for discussion
are project management, assertiveness training, leadership styles, effective one-on-one interpersonal and electronic communication, protocol for working with an interpreter, and lifelong
learning as necessary for job success. Through weekly meetings with their mentors, students
will share responsibility for interactions, establish a learning relationship, increase self-direction, and gain a greater understanding of the workplace. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to NTID supported students who have completed NAST-210 or (0806-101 and 0804-110) or
equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NAST-241 
Preparation for Microsoft Word Certification
This course is intended to prepare students to take a certification exam for Microsoft Word.
The exam tests proficiency through hands-on assessment in simulated Microsoft Office Word
applications. Skill sets include creating and customizing documents, formatting content, working with visual content, organizing content, reviewing documents, and sharing and securing
content. (Prerequisite: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed
NAST-150 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-242 
Preparation for Microsoft PowerPoint Certification
This course is intended to prepare students to take a certification exam for Microsoft
PowerPoint. The exam tests proficiency through hands-on assessment in simulated Microsoft
Office PowerPoint applications. Skill sets include: Creating and formatting presentations, creating and formatting slide content, working with visual content, and collaborating on and
delivering presentations. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NAST-225 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-243 
Preparation for Microsoft Excel Certification
This course is intended to prepare students for Microsoft Excel certification. The exam tests
proficiency through hands-on assessment in simulated Microsoft Office Excel applications. Skill
sets include: creating and manipulating data, formatting data and content, creating and modifying formulas, presenting data visually, and collaborating and securing data. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NAST-215 or (0804291 and 0804-302) or or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
NAST-244 
Preparation for Microsoft Access Certification
This course is intended to prepare students to take a certification exam for Microsoft Access.
The exam tests proficiency through hands-on assessment in simulated Microsoft Office Access
applications. Skill sets include: structuring a database, creating and formatting database elements, entering and modifying data, creating and modifying queries, presenting and sharing
data, and managing and maintaining databases. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID
supported students who have completed NAST-220 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1
(Fall, Spring)
NAST-289  Special Topics: Administrative Support Technology/Business Technology
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
NAST-299 
Co-op: Administrative Support Technology
Designed to give the student an opportunity to gain work experience, to apply what has been
learned and to self-evaluate personal and communication skills. Placement assistance is provided to help the student find a job related to his/her field of study. One co-op experience is
required for graduation. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

General Business
NBUS-200 
Orientation to Business
This course introduces students to a broad overview of the form and structure of multinational organizations. It provides students with a basic knowledge of the history, organization
and operation of business and its particular vocabulary. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture
4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NBUS-211 
World of Business and Innovation
This course is an overview of the functions and processes of business organizations. Topics
include the roles and responsibilities of the manager, managing business ethics and social
responsibility, competing in a global environment, organizational structure and authority,
and managing diversity, change, communication and innovation. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

146	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NBUS-217 
Fundamentals of Management
This course focuses on the management aspect of organizations. Students will learn a variety
of methods management uses to stay organized, lead and motivate employees as well as how
controls are established to ensure company goals are met. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the multi-faceted roles of leaders and managers in the workplace. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NBUS-200 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NBUS-221 
Essentials of Human Resource Management
This course acquaints Administrative Support Technology (AST) students with the basic concepts of Human Resource Management. Exposure to the changing nature of Human Resources
relates to employee retention, legality, EEO/Diversity, job analysis, recruitment, selection, training and development as well as performance management, compensation, benefits, employee
relations and labor relations. An overview of the range of duties and levels of responsibilities
found in this sector of the business environment will allow students to identify similarities
between job function required of an administrative assistant and of a human resources assistant. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed
NBUS-217 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NBUS-223 
Fundamentals of Marketing
This course introduces the field of marketing and its focus on how consumer behavior effects
in the marketplace (domestically and internationally). Emphasis will be placed on understanding the marketing mix and its impact on the external market environment. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NBUS-200 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NBUS-225 
Introduction to Entrepreneurship
This course introduces the role of the entrepreneur in identifying opportunities, seeking funding and other resources, and managing the formation and sustainability of the new venture.
Emphasis will be placed on understanding the development process from idea generation
to realization of a product or service by creating a business plan. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NBUS-211 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Career Development
NCAR-100 
Freshman Seminar
The course provides entering NTID students with opportunities to develop/enhance academic
skills, personal awareness, and community involvement in order to maximize their college experience. Students have opportunities to explore and navigate the college environment, develop/
reinforce academic skills and participate in service learning opportunities. Students are encouraged to establish meaningful connections with faculty, staff and peers. The course promotes the
development of plans for ongoing growth and involvement in class and in the RIT/NTID and/
or broader community. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
NCAR-110 
Wide World of Technology
This survey course introduces students who are undecided about their major to the evolution of
technology, its current day uses, and its impact on our global society. Through the exploration
of the relationship between individual value systems, interests, and skills, students will begin
to envision how they might fit into a specific technological career area. In addition, students
will begin to develop academic skills in critical thinking, problem solving, communication,
interpersonal relationships, and team work needed for success in the academic environment.
(NTID Supported Students) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
NCAR-115 
Career Decision Making
This course provides information and experiences regarding career exploration, career options,
workforce trends, and educational requirements. Students acquire career information from
relevant resources and select an appropriate career using a decision-making model. Students
develop a career plan after completing a self-assessment, gathering information on his/her specific career option, and participating in a program sampling experience of NTID/RIT academic
disciplines. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)

Communication Studies
NCOM-199 
Independent Study: Communication Studies and Services
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each course proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NCOM-201 
Interpersonal Relationships
This course examines the role of communication as it relates to establishing, maintaining,
and ending relationships. Topics include: relationship development; self-concept; perceptions
and first impressions; stereotyping, prejudice and discrimination; conflict resolution; active
and passive listening; personal and social values; self-disclosure; gender-related communication; intercultural competence; and social networking. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NCOM-202 
Intercultural Communication
This course is intended to provide students with an introduction to the concepts of culture,
communication, and intercultural communication as they relate to face-to-face communication. The students will learn about the relationship between culture and communication and
how to reduce potential conflict. Knowledge gained and skills learned in this course will apply
to communication in everyday situations, a diversified workplace and interactions in a global
society. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NCOM-204 
Dialogue on Black Perspectives
This course will challenge students to analyze and compare various perceptions about Black
American life in the 21st century. This course includes but is not limited to racial, economic,
and ideological shifts and their impact on past and current events. Cultural influences will
be traced from early Western Africa to the United States. Viewpoints on identity, language,
relationships, and generational differences will be explored through assigned readings and
interviews. Students will lead the class in open dialogues associated with their researched topics. In addition, varying perspectives will be presented through lectures, guest speakers and
personal experiences from individuals with diverse cultural backgrounds. Upon completion of
this course, it is anticipated that students will have broader knowledge of the multidimensional
aspects of the Black experience. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

NETS-120 
Manufacturing Processes
This introductory course investigates the four major categories of traditional manufacturing
processes as well as newly developed non-traditional techniques. This course focuses on understanding the concepts of past and current manufacturing processes. Students will learn how
typical industrial piece parts and assemblies are manufactured. Topics focus on processes and
related theory for the traditional manufacturing processes of material removal, metal forming,
joining, casting and molding, as well as more recently developed processes such as powder
metallurgy, rapid prototyping, EDM, chemical machining, water jet, LASER and plasma cutting. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NETS-150 
Mechanical Design and Fabrication
This introductory course investigates basic engineering concepts and how they relate to
traditional manufacturing processes and techniques. Topics will emphasize the design of components through the use of solid modeling, dimensioning, tolerancing, geometric dimensioning
and tolerancing, and statistics. In a related laboratory course, students will be expected to build,
inspect, and integrate their designs. (Prerequisites:NTID suppported student.Co-requisites:
NETS-151 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NETS-151 
Mechanical Design and Fabrication Lab
This lab course integrates basic manufacturing techniques with engineering design concepts. Traditional machine shop tools and precision measuring instruments will be used by
the students as they create the objects that they designed in the related classroom course.
(Prerequisites:NTID suppported student.Co-requisites: NETS-150 or equivalent course.) Lab
2, Credits 1 (Spring)

Computer-Aided Drafting Technology

NCOM-206 
Effective Teams
This course focuses on the information and skills needed to be a knowledgeable, effective participant in small groups and teams. Topics related to group dynamics and team-building are
addressed at the practical and theoretical levels. These topics include characteristics of effective teams, stages of group development, how groups operate for different outcomes, group
vs. personal goals, the role of diversity, and group decision-making and problem-solving techniques. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

NCAD-108 
Data Collection and Analysis
Students develop hands-on experience with basic measuring instruments used by the A/E/C
industry through lab and field activities. Students develop a methodology for recording field
measurements that can be accurately converted into digital documentation. Students also
develop the ability to interpret industry standard construction documentation produced by
others. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed
NCAD-150 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

NCOM-289 
Special Topics: Communication Studies and Services
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

NCAD-150 
Engineering Graphics in AEC
The objective of this course is to introduce students to engineering graphics as a means of communication in the technical fields of architecture, engineering and construction (A/E/C). The
course is laboratory oriented and provides the student with basic skills to create professional
2D drawings with this comprehensive first course in the use of AutoCAD software for mechanical, architectural and civil drawings. The course assumes no prior knowledge of engineering
drawing or CAD. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall)

Engineering Studies
Applied Mechanical Technology
NETS-101 
Fundamentals of Engineering
This course will introduce students to the field of mechanical engineering technology through
an exposition of its disciplines, including basic mechanics, fluid power, and energy. Students
will be introduced to design and engineering problem solving methods that will be applied to
problems in the aforementioned topic areas. Students will analyze data, perform design calculations, solve equations, and program devices. Project reports are generated through the
integration of these tools with word processing and presentation software. The application
of software tools to the engineering design process will be emphasized throughout. (NTID
Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NETS-110 
Foundations of Materials
This course introduces students to the commonly used families of materials. It focuses on
the fundamental principles of properties of materials utilized in the practice of engineering.
Metals, ceramics, polymeric materials and composites are studied, with a particular emphasis in steels and non-ferrous metals. Material selection is also discussed. (Prerequisites: NTID
supported student.Co-requisites: NETS-111 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
NETS-111 
Foundations of Materials Lab
Properties of materials will be determined through experimentation and use of reference sources. (Prerequisites: NTID supported student.Co-requisites: NETS-110 or equivalent course.)
Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall)

	

NCAD-170 
Construction CAD I
The objective of this course is to learn the fundamental concepts of building information modeling (BIM) and how computer aided drafting (CAD) is used to produce basic construction
documents. Students will learn to create a basic BIM project as well as learn basic AEC concepts
and terms. Students will also develop effective time management skills and file management
strategies. (NTID Supported Students) Lab 9, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCAD-180 
Civil Technology Graphics
The objective of this course is to develop an understanding of drawings and practices used in the
civil drafting field. Students engage in sketching exercises as well as use computer aided drafting tools to create plans and drawings for civil engineering projects. Students are introduced
to mapping, surveying, GIS, plot plans, contour lines, highway layout, profiles and earthwork
drawings. Students develop an understanding of the technical and legal purpose of these drawings and how to assemble them. No official prerequisites are required, but students should have
basic computer literacy skills. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NCAD-150 or equivalent course.) Lab 5, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCAD-199 
Independent Study CADT
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each student proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 5 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

147

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NCAD-220 
Construction CAD II
The objective of this course is to learn how Building Information Modeling (BIM) can bring
different disciplines together in a coordinated way to facilitate the design of a building. The
course will build on the CAD skills learned in Construction CAD I to develop a more complex
commercial BIM project that includes Architecture, MEP services and structural systems.
Students will learn various AEC concepts and terms as well as how to organize a set of construction documents. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who
have completed NCAD-108 and NCAD-170 or equivalent courses.) Lab 9, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCAD-230 
Construction CAD III
Students learn to apply 3-D CAD techniques to a multi-level construction project situated on
a site with significant topographic features. Students will function as a team to create a total
project model. Structural systems will be integrated into the construction of the building model.
Students will extract and refine a series of orthographic views of the site and building models such that a comprehensive set of working drawings is produced. (Prerequisites: This class
is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NCAD-220 and NCAD-255 or
equivalent courses.) Lab 9, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCAD-240 
Advanced Construction CAD
Students develop CAD and BIM skills gained in previous courses by adding skills in design
development. The project, a building of two or more stories, requires the synthesis of information and principles both from previous courses and from reference sources. Students will
create a BIM project from preliminary drawings. Some design work will be required as students will incorporate information from building codes, specifications and data for mechanical,
electrical and plumbing (MEP) services and structural systems. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NCAD-230, NCAD-265, NCAD275 and NCAD-285 or equivalent courses. Co-requisites: NCAD-250 or equivalent course.)
Lab 9, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCAD-250 
Presentation Graphics
Students gain specialized skills and knowledge in production of presentation graphics using
CAD and visualization software. Using general CAD skills as a starting point, students learn
to setup and render various types of images and animations for presentation of construction
projects to clients, agencies, boards, and the public. Students will engage in a team design project which will culminate with a final presentation. (Co-requisites: NCAD-240 or equivalent
course and NTID supported student.) Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCAD-255 
Construction Material and Methods I
Students study soil, aggregate, Portland cement concrete, asphalt cement concrete and wood
products used for construction. Laboratory work focuses on testing soil, aggregates and
Portland cement concrete. ASTM standards are used in all testing. Students also test mortar using ASTM standards and follow building codes for framing construction. Students will
engage in hands-on lab activities. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported
students who have completed NCAD-108 and NCAD-170 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture
5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCAD-265 
Construction Materials and Methods II
This course is a continuation of the Construction Materials and Methods I course. Students
learn standard technical vocabulary related to common construction materials, basic building
science concepts related to thermal insulation and moisture protection, and various construction framing methods. Students will also learn the aesthetic, economic and performance
characteristics of a wide variety of non-structural materials and finish products associated with
the construction industry. Hands-on lab activities are used to learn how many common products are installed. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have
completed NCAD-255 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCAD-275 
Principles of Structural Systems
In this course, students learn the basic concepts of loads and stresses and how the structural members of a construction project support and distribute loads. The overview includes
the practical aspects of how structural elements as assembled and incorporated into construction projects and the influence of building codes on the selection of structural systems.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NCAD108 and NCAD-170 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCAD-280 
GIS Fundamentals
Students develop basic skills in applications of geographic information systems (GIS). Through
hands-on projects, students will learn how to use GIS software, plan a project, create a database, conduct spatial analysis and create presentation graphics. No official prerequisites are
required, but students should have basic computer literacy skills. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)

148	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NCAD-285 
MEP Systems
Students learn to identify the basic components and operation of the mechanical, electrical
and plumbing (MEP) systems for a construction project. These systems include water supply,
sanitary sewer and waste water treatment, storm drainage, solid waste handling, power supply
generation, indoor climate control, lighting and communication systems. Students will learn
the advantages of specifying sustainable solutions for these systems. Students will become
acquainted with the graphic representation of these systems on construction documentation.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NCAD220 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCAD-289 
Special Topics: CADT
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 5 (Fall, Spring)
NCAD-299 
Co-op: CADT
Designed to give the student an opportunity to gain experience on the job, to apply what they
have learned and to self-evaluate personal and communication skills. Placement assistance is
provided to help the student find a relevant work experience. (Enrollment in this course requires
permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Computer Integrated Machining Technology
NCIM-101 
Blueprint Reading I
Students develop the basic skills necessary to read and interpret fundamental engineering
drawings of details, subassemblies and assemblies. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab
4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCIM-102 
Blueprint Reading II
In this second blueprint reading course, students continue to develop the skills necessary to
read and interpret prints of engineering drawings of details and assemblies. More emphasis is
placed on Metric drawings and Geometric Tolerances as applied to engineering drawings and
part inspection. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have
completed NCIM-101 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCIM-121 
Precision Measurement I
Students develop the skills necessary to measure to the highest tolerances commonly used
in industry. They measure parts or groups of parts using industrial methods and equipment.
Analysis of measurements and problem solving are stressed. (NTID Supported Students) Lab,
Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCIM-131 
Computer Integrated Machining Tech I
In this first course of a six course sequence, students develop basic skills for operating manual
and computer controlled machine tools. Laboratory instruction simulates introductory level
work in an industrial environment; student work is held to ANSI and ISO referenced standards
for dimensional and geometric accuracy. Safe work habits are cultivated, and industrial safety
rules are highly stressed during this course. (Co-requisites: NCIM-101 or equivalent course
and NTID supported student.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCIM-132 
Computer Integrated Machining Technology II
In this second course in a six course sequence, students continue to develop basic skills for
operating manual and computer controlled machine tools. Laboratory instruction simulates
moderate level work in an industrial environment; student work is held to ANSI and ISO referenced standards for dimensional and geometric accuracy. Safe work habits are cultivated, and
industrial safety rules are continually stressed during this course. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NCIM-131 or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: NCIM-102 and NCIM-121 and NMTH-206 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/
Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCIM-199 
Independent Study: CIMT
Students develop in-depth knowledge and industrial skills in a topic of their choice under the
supervision of CIMT Faculty. (NTID Supported Students) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4
(Fall, Spring)
NCIM-207 
Industrial Materials
Introduction to the many materials used in industry and the reasons why the final cost of producing a part is influenced by material selection. Metals, plastics and ceramics are covered
from the perspective of physical, mechanical and dimensional properties. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM-131 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NCIM-214 
CAD Applications
Students develop engineering skills in engineering graphics and solid modeling. Students will
primarily use computer-aided drafting (CAD) as a tool to generate 2D graphics and 3D solid
models. The course is laboratory oriented and provides the student with basic skills in spatial visualization, freehand sketching, parametric solid modeling, and creation of engineering
drawings which meet industrial drafting standards. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab
6, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

NCIM-252 
Computer Numerical Control II
Students develop basic skills in programming CNC machine tools. Laboratory instruction
simulates industrial environments in both the precision machining industry and the precision
optics industry; student work is held to ISO referenced standards for dimensional and geometric accuracy. Safety in the operation of automated machines is an integral part of the course.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM251 or (0813-250 and 0813-252) or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 6, Credits 3 (Spring)

NCIM-222 
Precision Measurement II
Students refine the measurement skills learned in NCIM-121. The emphasis of this course will
be on using the principals of Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing to inspect machine
parts. Emphasis will be placed on developing appropriate and repeatable inspection setups.
Hands on experience with Optical Comparators and Coordinate Measuring Machines will be
included. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM-121 and NCIM-131 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

NCIM-289 
Special Topics: CIMT
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 5 (Fall, Spring)

NCIM-233 
Computer Integrated Machining Technology III
In this third course of a six course sequence, students continue to develop basic skills for
operating manual and computer controlled machine tools. Laboratory instruction simulates
moderate level work in an industrial environment; student work is held to ANSI and ISO referenced standards for dimensional and geometric accuracy. Safe work habits are cultivated, and
industrial safety rules are continually stressed during this course. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM-132 or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: NCIM-251 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCIM-234 
Computer Integrated Machining Technology IV
In this fourth course of a six course sequence, students continue to develop basic skills for
operating manual and computer controlled machine tools. Laboratory instruction simulates
moderate level work in an industrial environment; student work is held to ANSI and ISO referenced standards for dimensional and geometric accuracy. Safe work habits are cultivated, and
industrial safety rules are continually stressed during this course. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM-233 or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCIM-241 
Precision Optics Manufacturing I
In this course students learn and apply basic optical principles used in conventional manufacturing of precision optical flat elements. Procedures and techniques include blocking, vertical
rotary grinding, rough bench grinding, double-sided lapping/grinding, polishing, deblocking
and centering. Students practice and apply appropriate handling, cleaning and visual inspection techniques. A brief introduction to spherical grinding will be included. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM-101 and NCIM-121
or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 3 (Fall)
NCIM-242 
Precision Optics Manufacturing II
This course is the second in a sequence of courses in which students learn to apply basic
principles of conventional and CNC manufacturing of optical elements. The emphasis in this
course will be on the production of simple convex and concave spherical elements. Procedures
and techniques include curve generating, blocking, rough and fine grinding, stick polishing,
deblocking and centering. Students practice and apply appropriate handling and visual inspection techniques. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have
completed NCIM-241 or equivalent courses.) Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
NCIM-243 
Optical Testing
In this course students learn techniques used for testing spherical surfaces, flats and prisms.
Topics include measurement of surface quality, focal length, power, irregularity, angle of deviation, basic interferometry, fringe analysis and lens aberrations. Specific measuring techniques
and instruments include auto collimation, distance object method, laser two-beam method,
spherometers, micrometers, Ronchi testers and test plating. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NCIM-121 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NCIM-251 
Computer Numerical Control I
Students develop basic skills in programming CNC machine tools. Laboratory instruction
simulates industrial environments in both the precision machining industry and the precision optics industry; student work is held to ISO referenced standards for dimensional and
geometric accuracy. Safety in the operation of automated machines is an integral part of the
course. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed
NCIM-132 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 6, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

NCIM-299 
Co-op Study: CIMT
Students develop machining skills with on the job training at actual industrial facilities. This
experience must contain a minimum of 350 hours of related work experience. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits
0 (Summer)

English (NTID)
NENG-102 
Introductory Reading and Writing I
This is a developmental English language course at the first level offered at NTID in which
students begin developing the skills necessary for understanding and using written English in
AOS degree programs at NTID. World knowledge topics are presented in various media and
provide the context in which students learn to: comprehend and use the basic constituents of
English sentence; develop a content word vocabulary of about 4000 words; and practice strategies for improving reading comprehension and written expression. In order to continue their
reading and writing skill development in Intermediate Reading & Writing I (NENG-112) students must complete this course with a C or better. (NTID Reading Test score below 50 and
NTID Writing Test score below 80). (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 6, Credits 6 (Fall)
NENG-103 
Introductory Reading and Writing II
This is a developmental English language course at the first level offered at NTID for students
who begin with reading skills higher than those in NENG-102 or have received an E grade in
NENG-102. Students continue developing the skills necessary for understanding and using
written English in AOS degree programs at NTID. World knowledge topics are presented in
various media and provide the context in which students learn to: comprehend and use more
of the basic constituents of English sentences; develop a content word vocabulary of about 4000
words; and practice strategies for improving reading comprehension and written expression.
In order to continue their reading and writing skill development in Intermediate Reading &
Writing I (NENG-112) students must pass this course. (NTID Writing Test score below 40 and
NTID Reading Test score 80 to 97 or grade of “D” in NENG-102). (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-102 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-112 
Intermediate Reading and Writing I
This is the first course in a two-course developmental English language sequence at the second level offered at NTID in which students work on reading and writing skills necessary for
AOS programs at NTID. General topics in science and humanities provide the context in which
students review the basic constituents of English sentences, begin to develop skills for comprehending and using complex sentence elements, increase their English content word vocabulary
to about 5000 words, learn to use independent reading strategies, and develop skills for writing paragraphs and longer compositions. Upon successful completion of this course, students
will continue their reading and writing skill development in Intermediate Reading & Writing
II (NENG-113). (NENG-102 with a “C” grade or better or NENG-103 or NTID Reading Test
score from 80 to 97 and NTID Writing Test score from 40 to 59). (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-102 (with a grade of C- or
better) or NENG-103 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-113 
Intermediate Reading and Writing II
This is the second course in a two-course developmental English language sequence at the second level offered at NTID for students who have completed Intermediate Reading & Writing I.
Students continue to work on reading and writing skills necessary for AOS programs at NTID.
General topics in science and humanities provide the context in which students use the skills
included in Intermediate Reading & Writing I, develop skills for comprehending and using
additional complex English sentence elements, increase their content word vocabulary to about
6000 words, begin to evaluate reading tasks to select appropriate reading strategies, and expand
their skills for writing paragraphs and longer compositions. In order to continue their reading
and writing skill development in Career English I (NENG-212) students must pass this course.
(NENG-112 or NTID Writing Test score from 40 to 49 and NTID Reading Test score from 98 to
124). (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed
NENG-112 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

149

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NENG-199 
Independent Study: English
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each course proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-212 
Career English I
This is the first course in a two-course sequence. It is designed to develop reading, writing,
grammar, and vocabulary skills that students need for AOS course work and for the work environment. The reading and writing components are thoroughly integrated with approximately
equal time being devoted to each. Grammar and vocabulary are thoroughly integrated into
the reading and writing components. Course content includes general and technical articles,
memorandums, letters, electronic communication, directions, work-related forms, and short
report. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed
NENG-113 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-213 
Career English II
This is the second course in a two-course sequence. It is designed to advance and refine reading, writing, grammar, and vocabulary skills that students need for AOS course work and for
the work environment. The reading and writing components are thoroughly integrated with
approximately equal time being devoted to each. Grammar and vocabulary are thoroughly
integrated into the reading and writing components. Course content includes general and
technical articles, memorandums, letters, electronic communication, directions, work-related
forms, and short reports. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
that have completed NENG-212 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-221 
Analytical Reading and Writing I
This is the first course in a four-course intensive English sequence. In this course, selected
shorter readings give students the opportunity to strengthen their reading comprehension
skills and world knowledge. Readings will include nonfiction, fiction, and theme-based articles
from library databases. The readings also serve as prompts for writing at both the paragraph
and essay levels. While developing their expository writing skills, students learn to recognize
and apply the traditional rhetorical modes used in writing. Students also will develop skills in
summary writing. Other components of the course include grammar and vocabulary instruction, along with editing and proofreading strategies. Vocabulary is taught both incidentally
as it appears in readings and formally using a vocabulary text. The readings follow a specific
theme and also will serve as models for examining style, organization and grammar. In order
to continue their reading and writing skill development in Bridge to College English I (NENG231) and Bridge to College English II (NENG-232), students must complete this course and
co-requisite Analytical Reading and Writing II (NENG-222) with grades of “C” or better. (NTID
Reading Test score 98-124 and NTID Writing Test score 50-59, or by department permission. (Prerequisites: NTID supported student.Co-requisites: NENG-222 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-222 
Analytical Reading and Writing II
This second course in the four-course intensive English sequence continues to strengthen
students’ reading comprehension skills and world knowledge, with an added emphasis on
critical reading, thinking, and writing. Readings will include nonfiction, fiction, and themebased articles from library databases. Students identify and examine an author’s purpose and
tone, bias, assumptions, opinions, facts, examples, evidence, patterns of organization, and
audience. Students also develop inference and deduction skills while learning to recognize and
avoid overgeneralization and oversimplification in their writing. This course, which follows
a specific theme, includes a short novel or novelette — fiction or non-fiction — as part of the
required reading. In order to continue their reading and writing skill development in Bridge
to College English(NENG-231) and Bridge to College English(NENG-232) students must complete this course and co-requisite Analytical Reading and Writing I (NENG-221) with grades
of “C” or better. (NTID Reading Test score 98-124 and NTID Writing Test score 50-59; or by
department permission. (Prerequisites: NTID supported student.Co-requisites: NENG-221 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-231 
Bridge to College English I
This is the first of two Bridge to College courses that also serve as the final two courses in the
four-course intensive English sequence. This course exposes students to a variety of reading
material, including nonfiction, fiction, and theme-based articles from library databases. It
includes a reading of a full-length novel, either fiction or non-fiction, and it offers strategies
for reading comprehension and interpretation beyond prior courses where applicable. Students
will engage in a variety of writing activities related to the readings. Vocabulary is taught both
incidentally as it appears in readings and formally using a vocabulary text. In order to qualify for testing and placement in Written Communication (NENG-241), Critical Reading and
Writing (UWRT-100) or First Year Writing: Writing Seminar (UWRT-150) students must
complete this course and co-requisite Bridge to College English II (NENG-232) with grades of
“C” or better. (NENG-221 and NENG-222 with grades of C or better, or NTID Reading Test
score 125-144 and NTID Writing Test score 60 or greater. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-221 and NENG-222 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

150	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NENG-232 
Bridge to College English II
This is the second of two designated Bridge to College English courses that also serve as the
final two courses in the four-course intensive English sequence: This course provides advanced
instruction on expository writing with a focus on refining writing skills introduced in earlier
courses where applicable. This course also provides instruction on responding to multiplepart writing prompts. Students taking this as a stand-alone course will use readings from
textbooks and online and database sources as the basis for their writing. The course provides further instruction in integrating sources into writing. Some writing assignments may
be managed through journal entries. In order to qualify for testing and placement in Written
Communication (NENG-241), Critical Reading and Writing (UWRT-100) or First Year Writing:
Writing Seminar (UWRT-150) students must complete this course and co-requisite Bridge to
College English I (NENG-231) with grades of “C” or better. (NENG-221 and NENG-222 with
grades of C or better or NTID Reading Test score 136-144 and NTID Writing Test score 60 or
greater) . (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-221 and NENG-222 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-241 
Written Communication
Written Communication is a composition course that enhances students reading, writing, and
critical thinking skills in preparation for Critical Reading and Writing (UWRT-100) and First
Year Writing: Writing Seminar (UWRT-150). The course engages students in the deliberate
practice of writing and learning when and how to apply specific expository modes in academic
essays. While strengthening their reading comprehension, students begin to develop an understanding of how writers use rhetorical strategies to reach a particular audience and achieve
their intended purpose in writing. Students also identify and analyze thesis statements and distinguish between main points and supporting details. Students write summaries and analyses
of the readings along with well-developed expository essays using a combination of rhetorical modes such as definition, classification, comparison and contrast, and cause and effect.
The course also emphasizes strategies for the appropriate incorporation of material summarized, quoted, and paraphrased from various sources as well as the protocol of documentation.
Students revise in substantive ways with the assistance of required teacher conferences and
Institute-supported tutorial services as they continue the process of becoming more independent writers. Students must complete this course with a grade of C or better. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-231 or NENG232 or equivalent course with grades of C- or better.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NENG-289 
Special Topics: English
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 6 (Fall, Spring)

Humanities and Social Sciences
NHSS-110 
Perspectives on Literature and the Arts
Students are introduced to basic concepts and terminology in the study of the humanities (visual
and performing arts, history, and philosophy) through a variety of literary works presented in
English and/or American Sign Language (short story, storytelling, novel excerpts, drama, film,
poetry, and ASL literature). Students will learn about intellectual/academic inquiry and issues
studied within these disciplines. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NHSS-120 
Introduction to Performing Arts
Studies the characteristics and elements of theatre and the performing arts, emphasizing the
principles and conventions that have guided theatre productions through history. The course
examines the ways that theatre influences and is influenced by cultures and by individual life
experience. Particular attention is paid to the development of scripts, visual theatre, theatre
vocabulary, and the emergence of Deaf and multicultural theatre. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)
NHSS-122 
Introduction to Stagecraft
Introduces the technical and design processes of theatre, including scenery, costume, lighting,
make-up, and prop craft. Students experience the range of skills needed to create successful
productions, and identify their own areas of interest and strength for future theatre participation. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NHSS-132 
Sign Mime, Creative Movement, and Visual Theatre
Expands students understanding of the use of physical space through creative movement strategies. These are supplemented by images, gesture and sign representation of story elements.
Techniques developed from visual theatre practices are studied. Through active participation,
students learn the language of movement, mime and visual theatre. Ensemble work based on
performance standards, character creation and theme development is emphasized. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NHSS-134 
Dance I: Jazz and Hip-Hop
Provides students with a wide range of dance movement and dance vocabulary, which is created from jazz dance, hip-hop and other contemporary dance idioms. Students will experience
a variety of dance form through physical movement including the styles of Bob Fosse, Michael
Bennett and Frank Hatchett as well as elements of street dance, including the styles of Laurie
Ann Gibson and Shane Sparks. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-150 
Deaf Perspectives on Contemporary Civilization
This course introduces students to the study of culture, society, language, communication,
the arts and humanities. Topics covered include cultural and linguistic diversity in Hearing
and Deaf communities; social groups distinguished on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender,
class and disability; and artistic works as expressions of cultural values. The course addresses
moral, ethical, and personal questions pertaining to fundamental human rights and responsibilities and is intended to prepare students for further study in the arts, humanities and social
sciences, including the emerging field of Deaf cultural studies. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-159 
Deaf Community in the Modern World
Introduces students to American and international aspects of Deaf culture and community.
Students learn about the language, norms of behavior, values and traditions, of Deaf people.
Historical and sociological perspectives and cross-cultural issues related to the hearing and Deaf
communities are analyzed. The formation of the Deaf community and Deaf culture is studied
to illustrate the meaning of Deaf Heritage and how art, sports, organizations, and technology
have combined to impact the lives of Deaf people. The achievements of many Deaf people in
a variety of fields are reviewed to underscore self-identity and self-advocacy issues. The study
of cultural, economic and political history is used to broaden understanding of current events.
(NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-180 
Introduction to Social Sciences
This course is intended to explore the understanding of human behavior and everyday life
using important concepts from social sciences. The course covers the fields of psychology,
sociology, and political science. Materials from anthropology and economics may be used as
well. The course focuses on the application of the social sciences to the study of business, art,
education, government, and other areas of interest. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-199 
Independent Study: Humanities and Social Sciences
The description for each Independent Study course will be specified in each course proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-219 
Understanding Human Interaction Through Dramatic Literature
Students will study dramatic literature with a special emphasis on analyzing the interpersonal
communication among characters in written texts and engaging in presentations, performances, and role playing. Students will apply their insights to real life situations. They will
also present their analyses to an audience and/or perform scenes from plays. The course will
enable students to gain important insights into their own patterns of communication and
develop effective strategies for presenting information to audiences and engaging in interpersonal communication. Each student is responsible for their own communication in the
classroom. This course is open to all RIT students; an interpreter will not be provided. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NHSS-223 
Scenic and Lighting Technology
Provides hands-on exploration of basic scenic and lighting techniques utilized in theatre productions. Students gain an understanding of scenic construction methods and technology
and lighting practice, as well as the safe and proper use of tools and equipment. This course
prepares students for Theatre Practicum and running crew responsibilities. (NTID Supported
Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NHSS-224 
Scenic Painting and Props
An introduction to the methods and materials of theatrical painting and props through a project-oriented class. Techniques, communication, and use of appropriate materials and tools are
emphasized. Students apply the skills learned to individual and group projects. This course
prepares students for more specialized work in Theatre Practicum. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-225 
Costume, Mask, and Stage Makeup
Explores basic stage makeup, mask and costume construction techniques. Students will gain
an understanding of the visual ways to develop and present a character on stage. Student actors
and technicians will create makeup designs, masks, and small costume pieces as a hands-on
expression of the research and development of a character concept. This course prepares students for Theatre Practicum and running crew responsibilities. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

NHSS-240 
Theatre History Through Deaf Eyes
Examines theater from its earliest origins to contemporary types of theater and issues in dramatic presentation. The role of theater in society and in a variety of cultures is examined with
particular attention to the role of Deaf performers, directors and play creators in specific historical periods. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
NHSS-248 
Theatre Practicum
Applies technical, performing, script analysis, stage management, and other skills to an actual theatrical production. Students contract with a faculty mentor for responsibilities and the
appropriate credit expectations. In addition to production responsibilities, students are expected to complete reading and writing assignments connected to the production. This course is
repeatable for credit. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-249 
Seminar in Performing Arts
Using seminar and workshop approaches, this course gives students the opportunity for
focused, in-depth study of a selected advanced topic in theatre. Specific topics vary from semester to semester, and address such areas as methods of acting, playwriting, production design,
systems of analysis, genres of dance, translation, and historical influences on theatre art. This
course is repeatable for credit. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-260 
Deaf People and Civil Rights
Students will learn the history and achievements of Deaf civil rights, as well as current challenges and future directions of Deaf culture and civil rights. Students will learn the basic history
of disenfranchised groups in the United States, how the civil rights process is begun and its
ultimate impact on the mainstream society. The course places special emphasis on research
and analysis of the Americans with Disabilities Act and involvement in a civil rights project.
(NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-269 
Visual Expressions of Deafhood
In this course, students will study how stories about the Deaf experience are communicated
visually through various types of artistic expression. The course includes fine arts, performing
arts, film, ASL literature and English literature. Attention will be given to historical context,
Deaf cultural values, and the themes and symbols used to tell these visual stories. The course
will address the role of artistic expression for recording collective cultural memories, for preserving cultural norms/values, and for promoting social justice. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-270 
Multiculturalism in the Deaf Community
Introduces students to multiculturalism in the Deaf community. Students learn about facts and
stereotypes related to race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality and physical challenges. The cycle and
internalization of biases (attitudes) and discrimination (action) will be studied. Recognition
of similarities and differences related to disability, medical, racial, ethnic, social-minority, and
cultural models will be explored to understand perceptions of disabled vs. able bodied individuals. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-279 
Seminar in Deaf Cultural Studies
Using a seminar approach, this course gives students the opportunity for focused, in-depth
study of a specialized topic in the field of Deaf Cultural Studies. Specific topics vary from
semester to semester, and address such areas as language and communication, the arts in Deaf
culture, identity and diversity in the Deaf community, and political, social and legal issues. This
course is repeatable for credit. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-281 
Civic Engagement
This course provides students with opportunities to engage in community service with Deaf
and hearing socially responsible and sustainability focused organizations. Some examples of
service learning opportunities might include working with Rochester School for the Deaf to
establish an edible schoolyard, Habitat for Humanity to help build low cost, energy efficient,
sustainable homes or working with organizations such as Foodlink and Rochester Roots which
partner with local farmers to provide people in need with healthy food and provide sustainably
produced local food. Students will undertake a civic engagement project where their individual
contributions will be amplified through purposeful involvement with local and global organizations. Students will research social, political, economic and environmental issues that affect
individuals, local and global communities, and become actively involved in seeking, proposing, and acting on solutions to selected problems. Students will explore ways in which change
is an individual and collective responsibility, driven by the interconnectivity of self, local community and global society. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NHSS-289 
Special Topics: Humanities and Social Sciences
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

151

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

Information and Computing
Applied Computer Technology-AS degree
NACA-150 
Network and Security Fundamentals
This course introduces students to fundamental concepts and concerns in the networking and
security fields. Issues of privacy, vulnerability, and tools for intrusion prevention will be key
topics addressed as they relate to personal computer, network and data security. Concepts and
terminology of wired and wireless networks, including networking hardware, media, communication technologies, protocols and basic network administration will be covered. Lab
activities will develop skills in installing, configuring, securing, managing, and troubleshooting a basic LAN network. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACA-160 
Programming Fundamentals I
This course will provide students with a study of the fundamental concepts, logical structures, and algorithms inherent to computer programming. Students will learn how to write
basic object-oriented programs in a contemporary programming language. (NTID Supported
Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACA-161 
Programming Fundamentals II
This course builds upon the programming skills developed in Programming Fundamentals I
and will cover more advanced object-oriented programming concepts, logical structures, and
algorithms. Visual information system modeling, graphical user interfaces and software testing topics will be covered. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NACA-160 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACA-172 
Website Development
This course introduces students to web page and small-scale website development. Through
hands-on laboratory experiences, students will learn the fundamental concepts needed to construct web pages that follow appropriate coding standards as well as basic design principles to
present content in an attractive and organized manner. Topics include HTML, CSS, graphical
elements, website publishing, and transfer protocols. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture
4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACA-174 
Website Implementation
This course builds upon the concepts of Website Development to provide students with a strong
foundation in designing and implementing complex websites. Topics covered include usability,
multimedia, design principles, client-side scripting, SSI, access control, and interactive pages
using forms and validation. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
who have completed NACA-172 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACA-199 
Independent Study: ACT AS
The description for each Independent Study will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NACA-289 
Special Topics: ACT
The description for each Special Topics course will be specified in each course proposal.
Lecture, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

Applied Computer Technology-Technical Computing
NACT-120 
Intro to Computer Applications
This course is an introduction to using general-purpose software tools. The tools to be covered include word processing, spreadsheet, database, and presentation software as well as an
email client. Students will do hands-on work in each application. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NACT-150 
Intro to PC Hardware
This course introduces the fundamental hardware concepts of Windows-based computers. The
skills required to install, upgrade and maintain computers are presented. The course provides
students with methodologies and hands-on activities related to the configuration, diagnosis,
repair, upgrade, and preventive maintenance of computer hardware, input/output devices and
data communications. Topics include the basic functions and use of test equipment, logical
troubleshooting of internal system conflicts and faulty peripherals, and electrical safety. (NTID
Supported Students) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)

152	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NACT-151 
Windows Operating Systems
This course is designed to acquaint students with the structure and function of windows-based
operating systems and to provide the skills required to install, configure and maintain them.
Topics include system concepts, system level commands, and commands relating to program,
file and applications management. Students perform a variety of functions, including OS installation and configuration, application program installation and management, creation and
management of directories and file structures, and partitioning and preparation of storage
media. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed
NACT-150 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-160 
Networking Essentials
This course introduces students to the basics of user security on their computers as well as
the basics of computer networking. Students will learn the importance of user security and
some of the tools and procedures needed to protect and secure their information, computers
and networks against attack. Basic concepts and terminology of wired and wireless networking including networking hardware, media, communication technologies and protocols, and
network management will be covered. Lab activities will develop skills in installing, configuring, managing, and troubleshooting a basic network. (NTID Supported Students) Lab, Lecture
5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-161 
Client-Server Networks
This course continues the concepts of computer networking with an emphasis on the networking client/server model. Various networking operating systems (NOS) will be examined as
well as both peer-to-peer and client/server network applications. NOS hardware and software
security tools are investigated and students learn how to install, configure, update/maintain
and troubleshoot both the client/server hardware devices as well as the appropriate security
tools. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed
NACT-160 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-170 
Intro to Web Development
This course introduces students to designing and coding a multipage web site. Topics include
an overview of the internet and web addressing, coding valid HTML and CSS, design principles, implementation on a server, and use of web development software. The use of hyperlinks,
graphics, and multimedia in web pages will be covered. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-199 
Independent Study: ACT
The description for each Independent Study will be specified in each course proposal.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
NACT-230 
Introduction to Programming
This course introduces students to the fundamental concepts and terminology of computer
programming. Emphasis will be placed on developing problem-solving skills in designing and
writing simple computer programs. The course covers such topics as developing flowcharts,
algorithms and pseudocode, and introduces students to variables, operators, conditional statements, looping statements, data structures, error-handling and debugging, and user interface
design. The course assumes no programming background. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to NTID supported students who have completed NACT-170 and one (1) math class NMTH140 and above.) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-235 
Intro to Database Applications
In this course students will learn to create database tables, queries, forms and reports using
a leading database software product for personal computers. Students will also learn how to
design a database from user specifications, and to form basic SQL commands. (NTID Supported
Students) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-240 
The World of Work
The goal of the course is to provide students with the business-related skills to acquire a cooperative or permanent job, and the personal and social skills to succeed on the job. Topics related
to workplace communication and relationships, as well as financial management, employer
expectations, and personal goal setting will also be covered. The course will also include the
development of job search skills, resume writing and interviewing, along with skills in word processing, spreadsheets and presentation software as needed in the workplace. (NTID Supported
Students) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-250 
Computer and Data Security
This course will explore the unique computer and data security issues encountered by computer technicians. Using current computer security tools and procedures, students will develop
more advanced skills in finding and eliminating security weaknesses, breaches, and malware
programs. Computer security incident response procedures will also be introduced in this
course. Hands-on lab activities will be used to reinforce concepts and to provide real-life situations that give students experience in handling suspected security breaches. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACT-151 and NACT161 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NACT-251 
Digital Systems Integration
This course explores the technologies that are integrated as part of larger control/automated
systems. Some of these technologies include, but are not limited to, the control and management
of audio and video systems, security and surveillance systems, lighting control systems, access
control systems, communication systems, assistive technologies and other automated business
features. This course will introduce some of these integratable technologies and provide a basis
for connecting, configuring, testing, controlling, monitoring and maintaining these systems.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACT155 and NACT-160 and NACT- 230 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-252 
Server Management and Security
Students taking the course will learn to implement and administer network servers by managing server devices, file systems, users and groups, and application software. Students will also
learn how to monitor and fine-tune server security and performance and to implement backup
and fault tolerance. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have
completed NACT-151 and NACT-161 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-260 
LAN WAN Design
This course is designed to provide students with hands-on experience with multi-protocol routers and multi-switched networks. The class includes basic router operations, architecture, and
configuration; switched Ethernet networks; virtual LAN technology; configuration of switching
devices; and troubleshooting. Students set up, wire, and configure expansion technologies in
an internet work environment. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACT-161 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-261 
Network Security
This course will provide students with a deeper understanding of computer and data network security. Students will examine an infrastructure design process for securing computer
systems and data networks, as well as methodologies and best practices for implementing
security, security policies, security testing, and incident response. The underlying principles
used to secure networks including security technologies, intrusion detection, authentication,
and cryptography basics will be discussed. This course will also introduce students to network
security planning, technology, and organization, and the legal and ethical issues associated with
network security. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have
completed NACT-161 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-266 
Network Defense Technologies
This course will provide students with a deeper understanding of the technologies used to
defend a network against security attacks. Students will be introduced to the concepts, principles, types, and topologies of current and future defense technologies. Various defense
methodologies associated with various Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Intrusion Prevention
Systems (IPS), and future technologies will be covered. Students will also learn best practices
associated with remotely securing and accessing business resources. (Prerequisites: This class
is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACT-260 & NACT-261 or
equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-271 
Client-Side Scripting
This course is an introduction to client-side scripting for the Internet using a common scripting
language. Students will be introduced to the syntax of the scripting language, and then learn
to build practical and interactive client-side applications. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACT-170 and NACT-230 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NACT-289 
Special Topics: ACT
The description for each Special Topics course will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NACT-295 
ACT Technical Capstone
This course provides an opportunity for students to work on technical projects that integrate
the skills they have developed in earlier Applied Computer Technology courses. Students will
work both independently and in teams to solve "real world" networking and computer support
problems in a professional manner. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported
students who have completed NACT-170 and NACT-200 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture
5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NACT-299 
Co-op: Applied Computer Tech
This course provides students with a 350-hour work experience in the computer field.
Students have an opportunity to gain experience on the job, to apply what they have learned
in their course work, and to evaluate their own technical, communication, and interpersonal skills. Placement assistance is provided to help students find a relevant work experience.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NACT295 or equivalent courses.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

Laboratory Science Technology
NLST-171 
Fundamentals of Chemistry I
This course is an introduction to the fundamental theories and principles of chemistry governing the structure and behavior of matter at the atomic and molecular levels. The language of
chemistry including nomenclature and symbolic representation is presented. Computational
strategies applied to stoichiometry, reaction analysis and solution preparation are practiced.
Laboratory activities focus on precision and accuracy in the collection of data. Chemical hygiene
and safety procedures in the laboratory are emphasized. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
NLST-172 
Fundamentals of Chemistry II
This course is an introduction to the concepts of kinetics and thermodynamics. Chemical
equilibrium and rate constants will be presented and quantified. The ideal gas law will be
explored. Mathematical models will be developed and computational strategies will be applied
and practiced. Laboratory activities will supplement course themes. Chemical hygiene and
safety procedures in the laboratory are emphasized. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to
NTID supported students that have completed NLST-171 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/
Lab 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NLST-199 
Independent Study: LST
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each student/faculty
proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NLST-220 
Analytical Chemistry
This course introduces quantitative analysis utilizing both gravimetric and volumetric techniques. Topics include volumetric preparation and analytical procedures, acid/base and electron
transfer titrations and related computational methods, and gravimetric procedures and analyses. Standard laboratory notebook protocol will be introduced and practiced. Chemical hygiene
protocol and safety procedures in the laboratory are emphasized. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NLST-171 and NLST-120 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 6, Credits 4 (Spring)
NLST-225 
Laboratory Applications
This course continues a focus on the application of laboratory tools, techniques, procedures,
and scientific theory. Course topics include study of written technical procedures, technical
writing, the reporting and presentation of scientific information, and topics related to the
job search process and working as a professional in the field. Students synthesize information learned in previous and concurrent courses by participating in job related simulations. A
Laboratory Science Technology portfolio will continue to be developed. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NLST-220 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NLST-230 
Principles of Organic Chemistry
This course provides an introduction to the principles of organic chemistry. Topics include
structure, nomenclature, and properties of carbon-containing molecules according to the various functional groups that are central to organic chemistry. Investigations involving chemical
reactions, data collection, and qualitative and quantitative analyses provide a framework for
laboratory activities. Chemical hygiene and safety procedures in the laboratory are emphasized.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NSCI162 and NLST-172 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall)
NLST-232 
Laboratory Mathematics
This course addresses classic laboratory calculations and elementary descriptive statistics in
the context of modern information technology and computing methods. Use of hand-held calculators and computer software to exchange, analyze and chart electronically-stored data is a
central focus of this course. Study is closely coordinated with student experiences in Laboratory
Science Technology courses. Topics include basic descriptive statistics with quality control
applications, capture and analysis of real laboratory data, exponential and logarithmic modeling, and applications of scientific concepts. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID
supported students who have completed NMTH-212 or higher or an equivalent course.) Lab,
Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NLST-235 
Principles of Biochemistry
This course provides an introduction to the principles of biochemistry through a study of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, proteins, enzymes, and nucleic acids. The metabolic pathways that
involve these systems will also be explored. Principles of general and organic chemistry will be
emphasized through an examination of the structures, concepts, and reactions that are central
to biologically important molecules. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported
students that have completed NLST-230 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

153

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NLST-240 
Biotechnology I
This course prepares students to perform biotechnical applications in industry-specific fields
of analysis. Standard methods, operating procedures, equipment/instrumentation, and protocols are introduced and reinforced. Topics include ethical issues in Biotechnology, DNA
manipulation, protein analysis, tissue culture, and molecular diagnosis. Sampling, testing,
and reporting in the field of biotechnology are covered. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to NTID supported students that have completed NSCI-162 or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NLST-245 
Biotechnology II
This course prepares students to perform Biotechnology applications in industry, specifically as
they relate to microorganisms, proteomics, and genomics. Topics include bacterial expression
systems for production, purification and characterization of recombinant proteins. Study will
include concepts of DNA manipulation/analysis and enzymology. Standard methods, operating procedures, and protocols are introduced and reinforced. Sampling, testing, and reporting
in the fields of Biotechnology, microbiology and molecular biology are covered. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NLST-240 or equivalent course.) Lab, Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Spring)
NLST-250 
Quantitative Instrumental Analysis
In this course students learn and apply concepts and principles of analytical testing using
laboratory instruments, instrumentation theory, and procedures. Concepts surrounding spectroscopy, electroanalytical methods, advanced and automated methods of instrumental analysis
are presented. Techniques including sample preparation, instrumentation set-up and maintenance, calibration, precision measurement, safety, and data collection/analysis are introduced.
Selected instrumentation presented in this course include electroanalytical meters/probes,
atomic and molecular spectrophotometers, and automated instrumentation. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NLST-220 and NLST172 or equivalent courses.) Lab, Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall)
NLST-255 
Chemical Separations and Chromatography
In this course students learn and apply advanced concepts and principles in analytical testing
using laboratory instruments/equipment, theory, and procedures as they relate to chemical
separations and chromatographic methods of analysis. Techniques including sample preparation, instrumentation set-up and maintenance, calibration, precision measurement, safety,
and data collection/analysis are studied. Selected techniques/instrumentation presented in this
course include solid and liquid phase separations/extractions, liquid and gas chromatography,
mass spectrometry, and capillary electrophoresis. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID
supported students that have completed NLST-230 and NLST-250 or equivalent courses.) Lab,
Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Spring)
NLST-270 
Chemical Technology
This course prepares students to perform industry-specific applications of chemical analysis. Standard methods, operating procedures, and protocols are introduced and reinforced.
Sampling, testing, and reporting in the fields of environmental, industrial, forensic, pharmaceutical, and food testing are covered. Instrumental, volumetric, and gravimetric techniques
are practiced, as they relate to the fields of chemical technology. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NLST-220 and NLST-250 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)
NLST-289 
Special Topics: LST
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each course proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lab, Lecture, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NLST-299 
Co-op: Laboratory Science Technology
This cooperative work experience gives students matriculated in the Laboratory Science
Technology program a practical sampling of working in the field of laboratory sciences.
Students will work under the supervision of qualified professionals while performing a variety of tasks pertaining to the field. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Liberal Studies
NDLS-256 
Travel and the Imagination
Using written texts, film, and photography, this class introduces students to the genres of travel as they reflect the literary and visual imagination. The local and the exotic as presented by
authors, directors, and photographers will be explored through visual and literary texts that
present the people, cultures and histories of sites around the world, narrated from the individual perspective. Students will read of journeys that invoke the psychological as well as the
physical experience of travel, experiences that serve as metaphors for life journeys. Discussions
will also center on the ways in which travelers bring a particular, and often western, lens to the
places they describe. Discussions will lead to the inter-connections among cultures and peoples as they enter the current global, economic, and political stage. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

154	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

NDLS-280 
International Studies Seminar
The International Studies Seminar provides students with the opportunity to learn about the
unique historical, geographical, economic, social, and political circumstances of a country other than the United States, and consider those factors that shaped the relationship between the
country being studied and its Deaf community. The course will foster a connection between
NTID students and the country being studied by introducing students to the spoken and signed
languages of the selected country as well as to members of the Deaf community in the country
via videoconferencing. The country to be studied, and the specific course topics for that country, will vary by instructor. This course will also serve as preparation for participation in a NTID
faculty-led experience and/or project in the country that is the focus of the Seminar. Specific
knowledge and skills required for this experience and/or project abroad will also be taught.
This course is required for students participating in the NTID faculty-led experience and/or
project abroad, but participation in the experience/project abroad is optional. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students with at least 2nd year standing.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Mathematics (NTID)
NMTH-140 
Mathematics in Society
This project-based course is intended for students interested in the exploration of mathematical thinking and procedures. It includes applications to real world situations and uses problem
solving skills. Topics include number sense, consumer mathematics, introduction to statistics,
basic geometry, number representation, and units of measurement including conversion in
English and metric systems. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
that have completed NMTH-110 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-180 
Foundations of Algebra
An introductory algebra course consisting of a blended lecture/lab component in which the
basics of evaluating algebraic expressions, solving linear equations and inequalities and graphing linear functions are studied. The Pythagorean Theorem and systems of linear equations
are also studied. Technology, in particular the graphing calculator, is an integral part of the
learning and problem solving in this course. To progress to NMTH-210 or NMTH-212, students must pass NMTH-180 with a grade of C or better. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to NTID supported students that have completed NMTH-110 or higher or equivalent course.)
Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-199 
Independent Study: Mathematics
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each student/faculty
proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-206 
Trigonometry for Coordinate Analysis
Students will study right triangle trigonometry with an emphasis on concepts and applications
related to computer integrated machining technology (CIMT). Topics include trigonometric
ratios in right triangles, coordinate geometry calculations, circle properties, simple and complex machine applications, and 3-D coordinate geometry. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted
to NTID supported students that have completed at least one (1) NMTH class - NMTH-180 or
higher.) Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMTH-207T 
Trigonometry for Coordinate Analysis II (T)
This course is a continuation of Trigonometry for Coordinate Analysis I and, continues the
development of problem-solving using right angle trigonometry, with an emphasis on concepts
and applications related to computer integrated machining technology (CIMT). Topics include
complex machine applications, compound angles, slots and pockets, irregular-shape grooves,
Law of Sines, Law of Cosines, and 3-D coordinate geometry. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
NMTH-210 
Applications of Algebra
An intermediate algebra course consisting of a lecture and a lab component in which exponents, rational expressions, polynomials, roots and radicals, and non-linear functions are
studied. Technology, in particular the graphing calculator, is an integral part of the learning
and problem solving in this course. Students may not take both NMTH-210 and NMTH-212
for credit without permission of the department. To progress to NMTH-260, student must
pass NMTH-210 with a grade of C or better. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID
supported students who have completed NMTH-180 or higher or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NMTH-212 
Integrated Algebra
An intermediate algebra course consisting of a blended lecture/lab component in which nonlinear functions and graphs, systems of linear equations, exponents, polynomials, roots, radicals
and properties of the complex numbers are considered. There is significant emphasis on scientific and geometric models, as well as the use of graphing utilities. Students may not take both
NMTH-210 and NMTH -212 for credit without permission of the department. To progress to
NMTH -260 or -275, student must pass NMTH -212 with a grade of C or better. (Prerequisites:
This class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed NMTH-180 or higher
or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-220 Trigonometry
This course includes topics from trigonometry with an emphasis on the study of right and
oblique triangles, rotational angles, and trigonometric functions and their graphs. An introduction to trigonometric identities is also provided. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to
NTID supported students that have completed NMTH-212 or equivalent course.) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-245 
Accelerated Algebra I
The first of a two-course sequence of accelerated courses (NMTH-245 & NMTH-265 or NMTH245 & NMTH-270) for students who are interested in acquiring the skills necessary for an
introductory-level calculus course. The topics include a review of the fundamentals of algebra, and solving linear equations and inequalities in both 1- and 2-variables algebraically and
graphically. Exponents, polynomial/quadratic functions and their graphs are also studied. To
progress to NMTH-265 or NMTH-270, student must pass NMTH-245 with a grade of C or better. (NTID Reading Test Score of 125 or higher and appropriate math placement score). (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 4 (Fall)
NMTH-250 
Elementary Statistics
An introductory statistics course utilizing a lecture/lab format in which statistics concepts,
probability, probability distributions, and bivariate data are studied. Statistical concepts that
are essential for an understanding of social and political issues of contemporary life will be
emphasized. Statistical software and applications will be introduced. (Prerequisites: This class
is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed (UWRT-100 or 0502-111) or
NMTH-210 or higher with a grade of C or better or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-255 
Introduction to Discrete Mathematics
This course utilizes a lecture/lab format to introduce discrete mathematics topics such as logic,
sets, number systems, counting, functions, graph theory, sequences and recursion. The applications of these topics to various topics in computing will be emphasized. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students who have completed UWRT-100 and NMTH212 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Spring)
NMTH-260 
Explorations in College Algebra
Students will study topics from algebra with an emphasis on functions and graphs. Topics
include the algebra of functions and the study of inverse functions. Rational, radical, exponential and logarithmic functions and systems of linear equations are also studied. Exploration
of mathematical concepts through use of a graphing calculator is an integral feature of the
course. Students may not take both NMTH-260 and NMTH-275 for credit without permission of the department. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
that have completed NMTH-210 or equivalent course with a grade of C- or better.) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-265 
Accelerated Algebra II for Business and Liberal Arts
The second of a two-course sequence of accelerated courses. This course, focused on applications and skills related to business & liberal arts, is for students who are interested in taking
a non-trigonometry, introductory-level calculus course. Students will study topics from algebra with an emphasis on functions and graphs. Topics include the algebra of functions and
the study of inverse functions. Quadratic, rational, radical, exponential and logarithmic functions and systems of linear equations are also studied. Students may not take both NMTH-265
and NMTH-270 for credit without permission of the department. (Prerequisites: This class is
restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NMTH-245 or equivalent course
with a grade of C- or better.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-270 
Accelerated Algebra II for Science and Engineering
The second of a two-course sequence of accelerated courses. This course, focused on applications and skills related to science and engineering, is for students who are interested in taking
an introductory-level calculus course. Students will study topics from precalculus mathematics
(without trigonometry) with an emphasis on functions and graphs. Topics include the algebra of
functions and the study of inverse functions. Quadratic, rational, radical, exponential and logarithmic functions and piecewise-defined functions are also studied. Students in the Engineering
program can take NMTH-220-Trigonometry and this course simultaneously. Students may
not take both NMTH-265 and NMTH-270 for credit without permission of the department.
(Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NMTH245 or equivalent course with a grade of C- or better.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

	

NMTH-272 
Accelerated Algebra II
The second of a two-course sequence of accelerated courses designed for students who intend
to continue into calculus. This course provides an in-depth treatment of solving equations,
inequalities, and systems of equations; function properties, graphs, and applications; and the
study of linear, quadratic, rational, radical, exponential, logarithmic, inverse and piecewisedefined functions. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that
have completed NMTH-245 or equivalent course with a grade of C- or better.) Lecture/Lab
5, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-275 
Advanced Mathematics
Topics from precalculus mathematics are studied with an emphasis on functions and graphs.
Topics include the algebra of functions and the study of inverse functions. Rational, exponential, logarithmic and piecewise-defined functions are among those studied. Exploration
of mathematical concepts through the use of a graphing calculator is an integral feature of the
course. Students may not take both NMTH-260 and NMTH-275 for credit without permission of the department. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students
that have completed NMTH-212 or equivalent course with a grade of C- or better.) Lecture
4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NMTH-289 
Special Topics: Mathematics
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

Science (NTID)
NSCI-153 
Processes of Science: Environmental Studies
This course covers introductory science processes using the content of environmental studies
as a vehicle to establish an appreciation of the scientific method, critical thinking and problem
solving. The basic processes of observing, collecting data, classifying, comparing, analyzing
and forming hypotheses will be addressed using the concepts of environmental studies. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-154 
Physics of Matter
This course focuses on introductory science processes using the content of physical properties
of matter as a vehicle to establish an appreciation of the processes of science. The basic processes of observing, collecting data, classifying, comparing, analyzing and forming hypotheses
will be addressed using physics concepts including mass, density, displacement and buoyancy. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed at
least one (1) NMTH class - NMTH-180 or higher.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-155 
Processes of Science: Biological Studies
This course covers introductory science processes using biology content as a vehicle to establish an appreciation of the scientific method, critical thinking and problem solving. The basic
processes of observing, collecting data, classifying, comparing, analyzing and forming hypotheses will be addressed using selected concepts in biology. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/
Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-156 
Processes of Science: Forensics
This course covers introductory science processes using the content of forensics as a vehicle
to establish an appreciation of the scientific method, critical thinking and problem solving.
The basic processes of observing, collecting data, classifying, comparing, analyzing and forming hypotheses will be addressed using the concepts of forensics. (NTID Supported Students)
Studio 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-157 
Processes of Science: Astronomy
This course covers introductory science processes using the content of astronomy as a vehicle
to establish an introduction to the scientific method, critical thinking and problem solving.
The basic processes of observing, collecting data, classifying, comparing, analyzing and forming hypotheses will be addressed using the concepts of astronomy. Topics will include stellar
motions in the sky, the solar system, and important historical deaf-scientist contributions to
astronomy. Contemporary astronomy issues will be explored including the discovery of planets outside our solar system and the search for non-Earth life. (NTID Supported Students)
Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-161 
Fundamentals of Biology I
This course provides students with fundamentals of cellular biology. Topics include chemical components of cells, cell structure and function, membrane transport, osmosis, cellular
respiration and photosynthesis. Principles governing genetics, gene expression and reproduction are introduced. Laboratory methods used to make observations and collect data are
practiced. Recording observations and analysis of data are emphasized in formal written laboratory reports. (NTID Supported Students) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

155

National Technical Institute for the Deaf

NSCI-162 
Fundamentals of Biology II
This course provides students with fundamentals of biological concepts and processes. Topics
include plant and animal form and function, nutritional and excretory requirements, and
homeostatic mechanisms and their regulation in organisms. Principles governing the concept
of biological evolution and genomic evolution are introduced. Laboratory methods used to
make observations and collect data are practiced. Recording observations and analysis of data
are emphasized in formal written laboratory reports. Laboratory activities complement classroom activities. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have
completed NSCI-161 or equivalent course.) Lab 5, Lecture, Credits 3 (Spring)
NSCI-199 
Independent Study: Science
The description for each Independent Study request will be specified in each student/faculty
proposal. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the
course.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-270 
Concepts of College Physics
This is an introductory algebra-based physics course focusing on mechanics. It is designed
to develop and enhance knowledge and skills necessary for success in college-level physics
courses. Topics covered will include uncertainty, propagation of error, significant figures, unit
conversion, translational motion in one and two dimensions, circular motion, kinematics and
dynamics (both translational and angular), torque, and angular motion. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NMTH-220 and NMTH275 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-281 
Human Genetics and Evolution
Introduces basic human genetics, basic human evolution and the relationship between 21st
century discoveries in genetics and current human evolution dogma. The history of scientific
discovery in both fields is paired with a study of current concepts in molecular biology and
bridges between genetics and evolution are explored. This presentation/ discussion/laboratory course includes topics in human reproductive history, cytology, embryology, molecular
biology of the gene, the origin of life, human origins, heredity, genetic variations, population
genetics, biotechnology, and old world and new world evolutionary theory. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-222 or NENG-231
or NENG-232 or NENG-241 or UWRT-100 or 0502-111 or UWRT-150 or equivalent courses.)
Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-282 
Scientific Basis of Social Responsibility
Interactive course designed to provide students with both tools and confidence to become
more literate in the sciences. Students select and analyze contemporary social issues and/or
problems that have a basis in science utilizing basic processes of scientific inquiry. Sample
topics include the following: infectious disease processes; traditional vs.alternative medicine;
biogenetics; life-style; euthanasia; environmental resources and management; world population trends; and, stem cell research. Following a definition of the issue/problem, students
formulate research questions and share their collective findings. They then complete weekly
topic summaries where positions are articulated. Topic-related laboratory exercises and community interactions provide hands-on lab opportunities to experience contemporary science
and technology. (Prerequisites: This class is restricted to NTID supported students that have
completed NENG-222 or NENG-231 or NENG-232 or NENG-241 or UWRT-100 or 0502-111
or UWRT-150 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-283 
Developmental Human Anatomy and Physiology
Introduces basic human development and maturation from a multi-disciplinary perspective.
In this course, the fields of human anatomy and physiology are merged with developmental psychology for the purpose of examining the human life cycle from a holistic perspective.
Changes that take place in the structure and function of the human body are studied over nine
stages of the human life span. Concurrently, psychological and cognitive development are
discussed, beginning with conception and ending with death processes. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-222 or NENG-231
or NENG-232 or NENG-241 or UWRT-100 or 0502-111 or UWRT-150 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-284 
Principles of Modern Astronomy
This course will provide students with a general overview of the fundamental concepts and
principles of modern astronomy. Topics covered will include properties of stars, their birth,
life cycle, and death, galaxies, black holes and the evolution of the universe. (Prerequisites: This
class is restricted to NTID supported students that have completed NENG-222 or NENG-231
or NENG-232 or NENG-241 or UWRT-100 or 0502-111 or UWRT-150 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
NSCI-289 
Special Topics: Science
The description for each Special Topics request will be specified in each proposal. (NTID
Supported Students) Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring)

156	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Science

College of Science
Index
BIOG	 Biological Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
BIOL	 Biological Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHEM	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHMA	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHMB	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHMG	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHMI	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHMO	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
CHMP	Chemistry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
ENVS	 Environmental Science. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
GSCI	 General Science .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
IMGS	 Imaging Science. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
ITDS	 Interdisciplinary Science .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
MATH	Mathematics.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
PHYS	Physics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
STAT	Statistics.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

157
157
162
162
163
163
164
164
165
165
166
166
168
169
172
175

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Biological Sciences
BIOG-101 
Explorations in Cellular Biology and Evolution
This course serves as an introduction to cellular, molecular, and evolutionary biology. Topics
will include: a study of the basic principles of modern cellular biology, including cell structure
and function; the chemical basis and functions of life, including enzyme systems and gene
expression; and the origin of life and evolutionary patterns of organism development on Earth.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
BIOG-102 
Explorations in Animal and Plant Anatomy and Physiology
This course serves as an introduction to animal and plant anatomy and physiology, in addition
to the fundamentals of ecology. Topics will include: animal development; animal body systems; plant development; unique plant systems; Earth’s terrestrial and aquatic environments;
population and community ecology; animal behavior; and conservation biology. Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
BIOG-110 
Field Biology
This course is a hands-on introduction to the ecology of individuals, populations, and communities. The dynamic interaction between organisms, including humans, and their environments
will be stressed. This course is intended for students who want to learn about ecology from a
citizen-scientist perspective. Included will be the concepts of evolution, life histories, energy
flow in ecosystems, population dynamics, food webs, the causes of temporal and spatial changes
in communities, and conservation. Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOG-140 
Cell and Molecular Biology for Engineers I
This is the first course of a two-course sequence designed to introduce biomedical engineering
students to the molecular and cellular basis of life with a particular emphasis on the integration
of molecular systems that underscore human physiology. This course will start with the basic
chemistry of biological macromolecules and then explore the cell starting from the nucleus and
moving outward. Major topics will include: DNA replication; molecular basis of inheritance;
the biology of RNA; gene expression; protein synthesis; the secretory pathways; and enzyme
kinetics. Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOG-141 
Cell and Molecular Biology for Engineers II
This is the second of a two-course sequence designed to introduce biomedical engineering students to the molecular and cellular basis of life with a particular emphasis on the integration
of molecular systems in human physiology. This course will continue exploring sub-cellular
systems by touring the function of each cellular organelle and describing the pathologic consequences that result from interruption of its normal function. Major topics will include: cellular
energy production; the cytoskeleton; the lysosome; the plasma membrane; vesicle transport;
cell-cell communication; signaling pathways; the cell cycle; and cell division. (Prerequisites:
BIOG-140 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

BIOG-142 
Biocompatibility and the Immune System
This course combines a traditional basic immunology course with an introduction to principles of the human tissue response to biomaterial implantation. Information is presented in the
context of common immune system pathologies to emphasize the relevance of immunology to
biomedical engineering and human physiology. Major topics include the organization of the
immune system and its myriad cells and cytokines, a review of bacterial and viral lifecycles,
antibody/antigen specificity, inflammation, bacterial adhesion, biomaterial surface characterization and sterilization. Students explore biocompatibility testing, and learn the molecular
basis for surface recognition and masking in implanted materials. The course emphasizes
the interaction of various immune system components with engineered biological devices,
implants, cells and tissues, and explores strategies and solutions for maximizing biocompatibility of engineered biomaterials with the immune system. (Prerequisites: BIOG-141 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-101 
General Biology I
This course serves as an introduction to cellular, molecular, and evolutionary biology. Topics
will include: a study of the basic principles of modern cellular biology, including cell structure
and function; the chemical basis and functions of life, including enzyme systems and gene
expression; and the origin of life and evolutionary patterns of organism development on Earth.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Summer)
BIOL-103 
General Biology I Lab
This course provides laboratory work to complement the lecture material of General Biology
I. The experiments are designed to illustrate concepts of basic cellular and molecular biology,
develop laboratory skills and techniques for microscopy, and improve ability to make, record
and interpret observations. (Co-requisities: BIOL-101 or equvialent course.) Lab 3, Credits
1 (Fall, Summer)
BIOL-104 
General Biology II Lab
This course provides laboratory work to complement the material of General Biology II. The
experiments are designed to illustrate concepts of animal and plant anatomy and physiology,
develop laboratory skills and techniques for experimenting with live organisms, and improve
ability to make, record, and interpret observations. (Co-requisites: BIOL-102 or equivalent
course.) Lab 3, Credits 1 (Spring, Summer)
BIOL-111 
Science in the Garden
This course will introduce students to the science behind how plants grow, and how to apply
this knowledge in a garden setting. The rationale is to encourage sustainability in garden food
production, with an emphasis on organic methods. The course will be part lecture and part
practical, with some sessions being conducted in the greenhouse or community garden. Lab
3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-121 
Introductory Biology I
This course serves as an introduction to molecular biology, cellular biology, genetics, developmental biology, and evolutionary biology. Topics will include: a study of the basic principles of
modern cellular biology, including cell structure and function; the chemical basis and functions
of life, including enzyme systems and gene expression; and both the processes and patterns
of the organismal development (ontogeny) and the evolution of life on Earth (phylogeny).
Laboratory experiments are designed to illustrate concepts of basic cellular, molecular, developmental, and evolutionary biology, develop laboratory skills and techniques for microscopy
and biotechnology, and improve ability to make, record and interpret observations. Lab 3,
Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-122 
Introductory Biology II
This course serves as an introduction to the diversification of life, plant anatomy and physiology, animal anatomy and physiology, and ecology. Topics include a survey of the taxonomic
diversity of the major groups of living organisms, the anatomical and physiological adaptations
of both plants and animals, and the principles of the ecological relationships among organisms and environments. Laboratory exercises are designed to illustrate concepts of taxonomy,
anatomical & physiological adaptation, and ecological relationships. Labs are also designed to
help the development of laboratory skills and techniques for experiments with live organisms,
and improve the ability to make, record and interpret observations. (Prerequisites: BIOL-121
or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-130 
Introduction to Bioinformatics
This course will explore topics in the field of bioinformatics including tools and resources used
by the discipline, including direct experience with the common user environment. Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-189 
Introductory Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (Permission of instructor) (This course requires permission of the Instructor
to enroll.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

157

College of Science

BIOL-201 
Cellular and Molecular Biology
This course will address the fundamental concepts of Cellular and Molecular Biology. Lectures,
assignments, and laboratory projects will explore the structure and function of molecules,
organelles, and cells and the biological processes they are involved in. Students in this course
will gain an understanding of various molecular mechanisms, structure/function relationships,
and cellular processes as they relate to cellular and molecular biology. Students in this course
will practice and carry out common laboratory techniques used by Cellular and Molecular
Biologists including, recombinant DNA technology, cell trafficking, and cloning techniques.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
BIOL-204 
Introduction to Microbiology
This course is an introduction to microorganisms and their importance. Principles of structure
and function, metabolic diversity, taxonomy, environmental microbiology, bioremediation,
and infectious diseases of bacteria are discussed. Basic laboratory techniques covered include:
microscopy; staining, culturing, isolation, and identification of bacteria; isolation and identification of normal flora; identification of unknown bacteria; antibiotic resistance; metabolic
tests; clinical and commercial testing protocols; and detection and counting of bacteria in environmental samples (foods, water, soils). (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab
3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-205 
Animal Behavior
This course is a comparative study of animal behavior from an evolutionary perspective.
Lectures will examine the organization of behaviors including survival behaviors, social
dynamics, and human behavior. Labs will demonstrate methods of gathering and interpreting behavioral data in the laboratory and in the field. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122
or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent
course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-207 
Galapagos: Ecology and Evolution
A semester-long lecture course followed by a 14-day field trip to Ecuador and the Galápagos
Islands. Students meet weekly on the RIT campus during spring semester to learn about the
wildlife and geology of the islands, and about their influence on Darwin’s theory of evolution. Galápagos is still an area of vibrant research and students will be introduced to current
ecological, genetic, and geological studies. We will explore ongoing difficulties of balancing
human needs with environmental conservation in the Galápagos. The field trip occurs shortly
after the close of the semester in which the course is given. We will visit various sites in the
islands, with excursions focusing on the unique wildlife and the geology. There are frequent
snorkeling opportunities. The course provides outstanding opportunities for nature photography. Enrollment is limited to 15 students. A travel fee is required. (Permission of instructor)
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall)
BIOL-211 
Invertebrate Zoology
A study of the biology of invertebrate animals with emphasis on phylogeny and functional morphology. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or
(1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-212 
Vertebrate Zoology
This course provides a synthesis of the ecological, behavioral, anatomical, and physiological
characteristics of vertebrates in an evolutionary context. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-218 
Biology of Plants
This course will focus on aspects of plant anatomy and diversity and their impact on plant
physiology. Adaptations to the environment and biotechnological approaches to unraveling
the physiology of plants will be explored. A feature of this course will be discussion groups on
plant topics from the popular scientific literature- e.g. Biofuels, Bioengineered Plants. The laboratory classes will follow the lectures closely, to give an opportunity to examine the structure
and physiology of different plant genera. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or (1001201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent course.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-230 
Bioinformatics Languages
This is an introductory course in scripting languages focusing on the Perl programming language, the R statistical analysis program, and their application to biological data. We will
investigate the use of Perl and R for processing sequence and "-omics" data, managing a variety of biological data types, and providing effective Web and graphical interfaces to existing
tools for analysis of these data. Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

158	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

BIOL-240 
General Ecology
This course is an introduction to population, community and ecosystem ecology, stressing
the dynamic interrelationships of plant and animal communities with their environments.
The course includes such ecological concepts as energy flow and trophic levels in natural
communities, population and community dynamics, biogeography and ecosystem ecology.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251,
1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-255 
Genetics and Society
Students will learn how genetic underpinnings of human health are discovered and how new
discoveries impact societal values, prompting debates around ethical consideration of their use.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-101 or BIOL-121 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-265 
Evolutionary Biology
This is a study of the historical framework of evolutionary biology, the meaning and nature of
evidence pertinent to biological evolution, The topics include earth history, the evolution of
proteins and the genetic code, cellular and metabolic evolution, molecular evolution, neutral
theory vs. selection, genetic variation, natural selection, migration, mutation, genetic drift,
fitness, population dynamics and genetics, species concepts and speciation, systematics and
classification systems, molecular phylogenetics, the evolution of protozoans, plants, fungi,
invertebrates and vertebrates, behavioral evolution, interactions among species, historical
biogeography, human evolution and variation. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or
(1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent
course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-289 
Intermediate Special Topics
This is an intermediate course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-290 
Vertebrate Evolution
This course is a study of the major changes in vertebrate functional morphology through time.
The course will begin with fossilized fish records. The vertebrate evolution will then be traced
to the era of mammals and end with humans. Additionally fossil evidence depicting major
transitions between the vertebrate classes, modern taxonomy, including cladistic analysis, geologic time and stratigraphy, and plate tectonics will be presented. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or
or BIOL-122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
BIOL-293 
Evolution and Creationism
This course explores the current controversy over the teaching of evolution in the public
schools. Topics covered include pre-Darwinian views of natural history, Natural Theology
and the argument from design, pre-Darwinian views of evolution, On The Origin of Species,
and the public and scientific reception of natural selection. The major 20th and 21st century
court cases, beginning with Scopes, and the Creationist responses, will be presented. The social
and philosophical implications of evolution will be a major underlying theme. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203) or (1001-251, 1001-252 and
1001-253) or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-295 
Biology Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature.
The level of study is appropriate for students in their first three years of study. (This course
requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Research, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-296 
Ethical Issues in Biology and Medicine
This course explores major ethical issues in medicine and biology via lecture, readings,
films, and presentation and discussion of cases. Students report on current events in ethics
as researched on the internet or other news media. The first portion of the course is in a lecture format. Students learn about various theories of ethical analysis that are in current use.
Subsequent classes are devoted to particular ethical areas. Relevant cases are given to the students for presentation in both written and oral formats. Any additional background material
that may be required to discuss the cases is presented by the instructor and the remainder of
the period is discussion based on the philosophical foundation provided at the beginning of
the course. (Prerequisites: BIOL-102 or or BIOL-122 or (1001-201, 1001-202 and 1001-203)
or (1001-251, 1001-252 and 1001-253) or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-298 
Biology Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their first three years of study.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits
1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

College of Science

BIOL-301 
Undergraduate Teaching Experience
This course allows students to assist in a class or laboratory for which they have previously
earned credit. The student will assist the instructor in the operation of the course. Assistance by
the student may include fielding questions, helping in workshops, and assisting in review sessions. In the case of labs, students may also be asked to help with supervising safety practices,
waste manifestation, and instrumentation. (This course requires permission of the Instructor
to enroll.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

BIOL-313 
Comparative Animal Physiology
This course is a comparative study of fundamental physiological mechanisms. It covers a
broad range of organisms studied from the standpoint of evolution of functional systems,
the mechanisms and morphological variations that exist to deal with functional problems
posed by the environment, and the special mechanisms used to cope with extreme environments. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or BIOL-265 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits
4 (Spring)

BIOL-303 
Cell Physiology
This course is a study of functional eukaryotic cellular physiology with an emphasis on the role
of global gene expression in cellular function and disease. Nuclear and cytoplasmic regulation
of macromolecular synthesis, regulation of cellular metabolism, control of cell growth, and
the changes in cell physiology in disease are covered. This course also covers the technology
used for studying changes in gene expression associated with cell differentiation and disease.
The associated laboratory covers microarray techniques. This includes design and implementation of an experiment to acquire gene expression data, analyzing the acquired data using
simple computer programs, such as MAGIC, and writing a research paper explaining findings.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)

BIOL-314 
Tissue Culture
This course will present the techniques and applications of culturing eukaryotic cells, tissues,
and organs in vitro. Emphasis will be placed on mammalian systems. Lectures will cover the historical background of tissue culture, how to authenticate cell lines, basic cell culture techniques;
as well as stem cells, tissue engineering, and the role of cell culture in regenerative medicine.
In the laboratory, students will be introduced to growth curves, cloning techniques, primary
cell culture, and making a cell line; as well as detecting mycoplasma and other cell culture contaminants. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)

BIOL-305 
Plants, Medicine and Technology
Plants have played a significant role in the shaping of our world. This course will explore the
utilization of plants for foods, fuels, materials, medicine, novel genetic information, and social
aspects of different cultures. All cultures depend on about fifteen plant species, most of which
have been changed by plant improvement methods to enhance human benefits. This course
will explore these changes in important crops, plant constituents used in medicine, and the
technology used to produce important plant-produced medicines. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201
or equivalent course.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-306 
Food Microbiology
This course presents the microbiology of foods. Topics include microbial food spoilage, foodborne pathogens, food preservation techniques, and environmental parameters found in foods
important in the survival of food spoilage microbes and foodborne pathogens. The lab will
include exercises on isolating heterotrophs from all kinds of food, isolation of fungi from various
foods, and the survival of various pathogens in food and beverages. (Prerequisites: BIOL-204
or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-307 
Microbiology of Wastewater
This is an advanced course in the microbiology of wastewater treatment, solids treatment, and
the generation and maintenance of drinking water. Topics include activated sludge processes,
clarification processes, disinfection processes, trickling filters, rotating biological contactors,
waste stabilization ponds, sludge microbiology, anaerobic digestion of biosolids, microbial
aspects of drinking water and drinking water distribution systems, and public health aspects
of wastewater and biosolids disposal on land and in marine systems. (Prerequisites: BIOL-204
or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-308 
Biology of Cancers
This course will address the fundamental concepts of the molecular and cellular biology of cancer cells. Class discussions, reading and writing assignments will explore the function of tumor
suppressor genes, oncogenes, growth factors, and signal transduction pathways in the context
of cancer cell growth, organization, and communication. Students in this course will gain an
understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the process of tumorigenesis, will
become aware of landmark findings, current research, and practice how to communicate effectively through scientific writing. This is a designated writing intensive course. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-309 
Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy
This course is a comparative study of the evolution of organ systems among vertebrate animals
with an emphasis on structural changes in homologous characters among representative vertebrate lineages. The course will explore the concepts of allometry, biomechanics, biophysics,
ontogeny, phylogeny using examples from vertebrate integument, skeletal, muscular, respiratory, circulatory, digestive, urogenital, endocrine, nervous, and sensory systems. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-265 or equivalent course.) Lab 6, Lecture 2, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-310 
Bioenergy: Microbial Production
This course presents how microbial processes are used to produce various biofuels from renewable feedstocks. The topics presented include bioethanol production, biobutanol production,
methane (biogas) production, biodiesel production, and the economics involved with the production of alternative fuels. (Prerequisites: BIOL-204 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
BIOL-312 
Human Genetics
The course provides an overview of concepts and applications in human genetics. Topics
include classical and complex mechanisms of inheritance, the human genome, human origins
& evolution, forensic applications, personalized medicine, and ethical issues. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

	

BIOL-321 Genetics
Introduction to the principles of inheritance; the study of genes and chromosomes at molecular, cellular, organismal, and population levels. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-322 
Developmental Biology
This course is a study of the processes of growth, differentiation and development that lead
to the mature form of an organism. The course will also address how developmental biology is integrated with other aspects of biology including disease, ecology, and evolution.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-325 
Bioinformatic Analysis of Macromolecules
This course addresses the fundamental concepts of bioinformatics, especially in regards to computational analysis of nucleic acids and proteins. The nature and extent of information available
in bioinformatic databases will be presented. Discussion and utilization of computational
programs for analysis of individual and multiple sequences for functional and evolutionary
information will be discussed. The computational laboratory will highlight the multitude of
web-based applications available for analysis of molecular sequences. (Prerequisites: BIOL201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-330 Bioinformatics
Bioinformatics introduces students to the analysis of biological sequences: DNA, mRNA,
and protein. Emphasis is placed on classical bioinformatics analyses such as gene prediction,
sequence alignment, and phylogenetics. The methods are applicable to both human and model
organism studies in medical, biotechnological, and classical biology research. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-335 
Phage Biology
Viruses that infect bacteria (phages) are ubiquitous wherever their hosts reside — whether in
soil, a hot spring or our own digestive tract. Phages are also the most abundant and diverse biological entities, consequently phage research is relevant to health, industry, agriculture, ecology
and evolution. Phage Biology is a research-intensive course designed to explore the fundamental properties of phages, how they interact with their bacterial hosts, the major techniques used
to characterize them and their applications. Since phage particles are comprised of DNA and
protein the techniques employed in this course have relevance to many other biological disciplines. This course will develop both laboratory and analytical skills as students will isolate
and characterize mutant phages in a novel model system, becoming mutation sleuths to determine mutation locations and their effect. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or BIOL-204 or equivalent
courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-340 Genomics
This course introduces students to the analysis of complex genomes. Emphasis is placed on
genetic information derived from the human genome project but advances with genomes of
other model systems will be discussed. Lectures cover scientific techniques used to map and
sequence the human genome, as well as strategies for identification of disease susceptibility
genes. The laboratory utilizes an automated DNA sequencer to demonstrate the acquisition
of genetic sequences. Laboratory sessions emphasize cycle sequencing of cloned DNA fragments using an automated fluorescent DNA sequencer. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent
course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-341 
Synthetic Biology
The goal of the emerging field of synthetic biology is to design and construct novel biological
systems that are useful. Synthetic biology examines the whole system of genes and gene products, their regulation, co-regulation and the interactions among their products, not individual
genes. This course will cover organisms with known and characterized processes that are used
to add or modify biological functions. Students will become proficient in the understanding
of synthetic biology concepts and will master basic laboratory techniques utilized in synthetic
biology. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

159

College of Science

BIOL-343 
Tropical Ecology
This course is designed to provide an introduction to the concepts of tropical ecology and ecosystems, including elements of structure and function. Both biotic and abiotic components will
be considered. Following a survey of the major tropical ecosystem types, case studies of tropical rainforests and mangrove swamps will be covered in depth. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-345 
Molecular Ecology
This course explores the biology of populations and communities of organisms using molecular data. As DNA, RNA and proteins are nearly universal between organisms, the principles
taught in this course will have wide applications, both within ecology and throughout many
sub-disciplines of biology. Furthermore, this course will prepare students to apply the techniques in numerous research fields. The primary literature and worldwide applications of the
field of molecular ecology will be incorporated into the course. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-350 
Computational Genomics
This course is intended to introduce students to the many aspects of genomics research that
are possible after DNA sequences, mRNA expression levels and resulting protein structures are
determined and catalogued in a database. We will cover fundamentals of functional, comparative, and structural genomics, including some topics in gene expression and epigenomics. We
will give equal treatment to both gene coding and functional non-coding regions of genomes
and occasionally include some new topics from the primary literature. Class time will be computer-intensive with roughly 50% lecture/discussion and 50% on task on the computer. There is
no computer programming prerequisite, as this course is intended to allow biology students of
any experience level to further develop their computing skills. We will start with GUI-oriented
freeware programs (e.g. MEGA 5.1 and protein visualization) and some web-based tools, then
introduce simple Perl and R scripting from the command line. Students will conduct a class
project by developing a simple workflow using Perl and R code to investigate and graphically
display a computational feature of interest in the genomes of humans or model organisms.
(Prerequisites: (BIOL-201 and CHMG-141) and (MATH-161 or STAT-145) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-365 
Introduction to Population Genetics
This course consists of a study of DNA, genes, inheritance, genetic variation, genetic architecture, and change within and among populations. Fundamental genetics topics include DNA,
gene, and chromosomal structure and function along with, transmission genetics, Mendelian
inheritance patterns, sex-linked inheritance, genetic linkage, and the Hardy-Weinberg
Principle. Population based topics will include genetic variation, its importance, how it originates and is maintained as well as inbreeding, random mating, mutation, migration, selection,
genetic drift, the effects of small population size, fitness, population subdivision, the shifting balance theory, inter-deme selection, kin selection, neutral theory, molecular evolution,
molecular clocks, multi-gene families, gene conversion, artificial selection, the genetic basis
of quantitative traits and the fundamental theorem of natural selection. (Prerequisites: BIOL265 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-370 
Environmental Microbiology
This course presents the microbiology of soils, freshwater, marine environments, and extreme
environments. Topics include nutrient cycling in soils by microorganisms, the diversity of
microorganisms in soils, the role of microorganisms in freshwater environments such as lakes,
rivers, and wetlands and marine environments such as the open ocean, coastline environments,
and salt marshes, and the diversity of microorganisms in extreme environments including highly acidic, highly alkaline, and highly saline environments. Laboratory experiments will explore
the types of bacteria in different types of soils in Western New York, types of bacteria in different freshwater environments in Western NY, determining total and fecal coliform counts in
freshwaters, determining the presence of antibiotic resistant coliforms in sediment samples,
and examining the survival of various human pathogens in surface waters. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-204 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-371 
Freshwater Ecology
This course will explore the ecology of freshwater ecosystems, including rivers, lakes, and
wetlands; with an emphasis on ecosystems in Western New York. The chemical and physical environment of each system and the resulting biological communities will be explored.
Threats to the ecosystem services supplied by freshwater resources will also be investigated.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)

BIOL-375 
Advanced Immunology
This course is an in-depth treatment of the molecular and cellular events associated with innate
and adaptive immune responses. The response of the host to the environment of microbes and
pathogens will be emphasized. Recognition and response of the host to the infectious agents
and the resolution of the disease state will be examined at the cellular and molecular levels.
The immune response to tumors will be treated and medical advances in treating neoplastic
disease using immunological therapy will be presented. The laboratories will focus on the cellular and molecular techniques employed in the modern immunology laboratory. A laboratory
module employing hybridoma techniques will provide an intensive experience with monoclonal antibodies and their use in diagnostics and disease treatment. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or
equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-377 
Directed Research in Developmental Biology
In this lab-based course, students perform original research on the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of development. Students use classical embryological, bioinformatics, molecular
biology, and/or microscopy techniques, depending on the project. Students read and discuss
primary scientific literature in a lab meeting setting, write a research paper and present their
research findings in a talk or poster. Lab meets in two three-hour blocks; students are also
expected to work independently for an additional three hours per week. (Prerequisites: BIOL201 or equivalent course.) Lab 6, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-380 Bioremediation
This course is an introduction to bioremediation focusing on the interactions between engineers, chemists, hydrologists, and microbiologists to develop, design, and implement strategies
to remediate contaminated soils or water. Topics include microorganisms involved in bioremediation, types of chemical pollutants, economics of remediation, environmental factors
important in bioremediation, in situ processes, and ex situ processes. The laboratory project involves the isolation of hydrocarbon degrading bacteria from soils and sediments and
further characterization of the hydrocarbon degrading isolates with respect to types of hydrocarbons degraded and rate of degradation. (Prerequisites: BIOL-204 or equivalent course.) Lab
3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-385 
Seneca Park Zoo Internship
This course will combine in-class lecture from specialists in the zoological field with volunteering in a zoo. This course will require the use of knowledge gained to design an exhibit for
a selected species as a group. Topics covered will include the purpose of zoos, the history of
the Seneca Park Zoo, wildlife medicine, population (conservation) genetics, biological exhibit
design, zoo research, animal behavior, zoo management, zoo community education, and zoo
ethics. There will be an opportunity to develop an understanding of the biological basis of the
zoo’s activities. This course will provide an intensive hands-on experience by assisting zoo staff
in one department area for 8 hours, plus 2 hours of classroom work, per week over the quarter. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or BIOL-265 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-389 
Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is
structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. The level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study.
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-401 
Biological Separations: Principles and Practices
This is a laboratory-based course that teaches classic concepts and techniques to enable the
use of these techniques to purify small molecules and macromolecules from whole organisms.
Detection techniques will include the use of bacterial biosensors, coomassie-blue staining, silver staining, and immunoblot analysis. Separation techniques will include SDS Polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE) analysis, thin layer chromatography, and paper electrophoresis.
Purification techniques will include ammonium sulfate precipitation, affinity chromatography, and thin layer chromatography. (Prerequisites: BIOL-321 and BIOL-325 or equivalent
courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-414 
Animal Nutrition
In this course, students will explore applied topics in companion, agriculture, and wildlife
animal nutrition. Emphasis will be placed on an overview of nutrient classes and methods
of nutrient analysis, biological nutrient requirements and common problems arising from
nutrient deficiencies, comparative digestive strategies, and specialized adaptations of animal
with different feeding strategies. Class discussions will focus on reading and interpretation
of primary literature and investigating applied nutritional research questions. (Prerequisite:
BIOL-212 or BIOL-313 or equivalent.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-415 Virology
This course is an introduction to virology with specific emphasis on the molecular mechanisms
of virus infection of eukaryotic cells and virus-cell interactions. Virus structure, genetics, the
infectious cycle, replication strategies, pathogenesis, persistence, effects on host macromolecular synthesis, viral oncogenesis, viral vectors, emerging viral diseases, and strategies to protect
against and combat viral infection will be discussed. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

160	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

College of Science

BIOL-416 
Plant Biotechnology
In this course aspects of plant biotechnology will be investigated. Areas of concentration will
include: tissue culture, genetic transformation of plant cells, regeneration of transgenic plants,
and the construction and characterization of transgenic plants for food production, experimental biology investigations, and novel product(development. The laboratory will provide
experiences to complement(the lecture information in plant cell culture and experiences in the
use of Agrobacterium as the gene shuttle to introduce novel genetic information into plants.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-204 and BIOL-321 and BIOL-325 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture
3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-418 
Plant Molecular Biology
The course will introduce molecular biology concepts and encourage the application of these
concepts to the particular plant gene being studied. This upper-level elective course has a strong
laboratory element. Small groups will study different plant genes during the semester. The laboratory element will be a self-paced group project to amplify, clone, sequence, and examine the
expression profiles of plant genes. Gene databases such as TAIR and NCBI, as well as sequence
analysis software, will be used throughout the course. The groups will be guided to make weekby-week project plans, to troubleshoot problems, and record results in laboratory notebooks.
In addition, weekly results and progress will be shared via an interactive wiki. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-420 
Bacterial-Host Interactions
This course focuses on the mechanisms bacteria use to interact with higher organisms (humans,
plants and other eukaryotic organisms) during both pathogenesis and symbiosis. The emphasis
is at the molecular level, drawing on the disciplines of genetics, biochemistry, molecular biology,
and cell biology. Several agonistic and antagonistic interactions are used to illustrate broader
principles and contribute to a fundamental understanding of(biological processes. The results of
these interactions have a strong impact on biological productivity, and so are also important in
applied systems. (Prerequisites: BIOL-321 or equivalent course.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Spring)
BIOL-425 
Ethics in Bioinformatics
This course focuses on individual and organizational responsibilities in bioinformatics research,
product development, product commercialization and clinical and consumer genetic testing.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
BIOL-427 
Microbioal and Viral Genetics
This course will examine bacterial and viral genetic systems. These systems will be studied with
the idea that they are simple examples of the genetics systems found in higher organisms, and
can also be used as biotechnological tools. This course will show how these prokaryotic systems have served as excellent model systems for studying the genetics of higher organisms.
This course will examine how these systems can be genetically manipulated using transformation, transduction, transposition, and conjugation. Bacteria and viruses will be discussed
as important tools for many of the greatest discoveries in biology; especially in molecular biology and genetics. In addition some of the primary research journal articles will be critiqued.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-321 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
BIOL-428 
Eukaryotic Gene Regulation and Disease
This course presents an overview of gene expression in eukaryotic systems, with an emphasis
on how disease can result when gene regulation is disrupted. Points of control that are examined include: chromatin structure, transcription initiation, transcript processing, stability and
modification, RNA transport, translation initiation, post-translational events, and protein stability. The mechanisms involved in regulating these control points are discussed by exploring
specific well studied cases. The significance of these processes is highlighted by a discussion of
several diseases that have been shown to be due to defects in gene regulation. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-430 
Bioinformatics Algorithms
Bioinformatics Resources will focus on the types of analyses, tools, and databases that are
available and commonly used in Bioinformatics. The labs will apply the lecture material in
the analysis of real data. (Prerequisites: BIOL-330 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2,
Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-440 
Advanced Applied Genomics
This course will involve students in genomics research through hands-on projects. DNA
sequences obtained from genome sequencing centers will be finished and annotated during
two three-hour laboratory sessions each week. A one-hour lecture will be used to introduce
important concepts and techniques, to share ongoing student experiences, challenges and triumphs and to discuss final reports. (Prerequisites: BIOL-340 or equivalent course.) Lecture
1, Research 6, Credits 3 (Spring)

BIOL-444 Ornithology
This course will cover the major principles in ornithology from evolutionary origins to the
study of physiology, flight, behavior, life history traits and conservation. Exploration of current topics in avian biology and exploration of bird diversity will be key features of the lecture
and lab. Labs will introduce current techniques in applied avian research and monitoring in
both the field and lab. (Prerequisites: BIOL-212 or BIOL-240 or equivalent courses.) Lab 2,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-450 
Genetic Engineering
This course is a laboratory-intensive introduction to the theoretical basis, laboratory techniques,
and applications of gene manipulation. (Prerequisites: BIOL-201 or equivalent course.) Lab
8, Lecture 2, Credits 5 (Spring)
BIOL-455 Biogeography
This course is the study of the distribution of biodiversity on the earth. Patterns of past and
present animal and plant distributions are used to help understand the mechanisms of basic
biological processes including speciation, dispersal, divergence, and extinction. This course
will cover the character and history of the science of biogeography, as well as its basic principles
and applications. We will also examine the assumptions, methods, and conclusions of historically significant biogeographic studies. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or BIOL-265 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-473 
Marine Biology
This course explores marine biology by focusing on the diversity of life and influence of oceanographic phenomena on the various ecosystems. Morphological and physiological adaptations
along with environmental threats will also be investigated. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-475 
Conservation Biology
This course focuses on the application of ecological principles to conservation issues. Human
impact on species diversity is emphasized as it relates to agricultural, forest, coastal and wetland ecosystems. Case studies of management practices used to manage and restore disturbed
ecosystems are included. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
BIOL-489 
Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is
structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. The level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 1 - 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-490H 
Avian Sensory Overload
This is an advanced research seminar course, offered at the level of an introductory graduate
seminar, that explores the anatomy, physiology, and performance of avian sensory systems
and the unintended consequences of man-made, and ecologically inappropriate, stimuli and
noise/pollution sources. The majority of the course is organized as group discussions of the
scientific literature. Students will lead these class discussions and present the results of their
literature research and review. Field study investigations of the topics discussed will be completed as feasible. (Prerequisites: Minimum 4th year student standing in BIOL-BS, BIOINFO-BS,
BIOTECH-BS or ENVS-BS.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-494 
Molecular Modeling and Proteomics
This course will explore two facets of protein molecules: their structure and their expression.
The structure component will build upon information from earlier bioinformatics courses.
The course will also include the analysis of inter-molecular interactions, such as ligand/receptor pairing, by employing software that permits modeling of molecular docking experiments.
Tissue-specific protein expression will be addressed in lectures with descriptions of microarray, SAGE, 2D gel electrophoresis and other contemporary technologies and in the laboratory
through software commonly used to analyze and compare gene expression levels. Each student will be assigned a project designed to integrate salient principles covered in the course
and provide an opportunity for each student to give an oral presentation to his or her peers.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-330 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
BIOL-495 
Advanced Biology Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory or field work,
computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature.
The level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study. (This course
requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Research, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-498 
Advanced Biology Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their final two years of study.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

161

College of Science

BIOL-499 
Biology Co-op
Cooperative education experience for undergraduate biological sciences students. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-500 
Experiential Learning Requirement in Life Science
The experiential learning (EL) requirement may be fulfilled through a variety of methods
including co-op, undergraduate research, summer research experiences, study abroad relevant
to the major, designated EL courses, etc. All experiences must be approved by the GSOLS EL
Committee. Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-550 
High Throughput Sequencing Analysis
Students will utilize commonly used bioinformatics tools to analyze a real High Throughput
Sequencing data set starting with raw data, proceeding with quality control, either aligning to
a reference genome or performing de novo assembly, assessing differential gene expression
determination, and finally annotating their results. Weekly lab reports will be required, and a
group manuscript is expected at the end of the semester. (Prerequisites: BIOL-321 or equivalent course.) Lab 6, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
BIOL-570 
Research Scholars I
This course represents the first semester of the Research Scholars Program. Long-term research
projects (minimum of 3 semesters) are undertaken with the mentorship of a faculty sponsor.
Students must apply to the School of Life Sciences Research Scholars Program and be accepted prior to registration. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Lab 4, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-571 
Research Scholars II
This course is taken in the second semester of the Research Scholars Program. A long-term
research project (minimum of 3 semesters) is undertaken with the mentorship of a faculty
sponsor. Oral presentations about the research projects are evaluated by a faculty committee.
(Prerequisites: BIOL-570 or equivalent course.) Lab, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-572 
Research Scholars III
This course is the third semester of the Research Scholars Program. Long-term research projects (minimum of 3 semesters) are undertaken with the mentorship of a faculty sponsor. This
course may be repeated for additional credit if desired. (Prerequisites: BIOL-571 or equivalent
course.) Lab, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL-599 
Research Based Writing
This course is intended for students with significant research experience to work closely with
their faculty mentors to prepare a manuscript for publication or write a proposal for external
funding. Students will devote significant time to writing, revision and peer review. A submission-quality manuscript or proposal is expected at the end of the semester. (Prerequisites:
BIOL-495 or BIOL-570 or equivalent course and permission of instructor.) Research 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Chemistry
CHEM-130 
Chemistry Connections
This course introduces first-year chemistry and biochemistry majors to the topics of chemical
safety, ethics, database searching, citation protocol, presentation development and execution
as well as the career options in the field and opportunities at RIT and beyond. These topics
will be covered in the context of developing a product that the student will accomplish during the lab component of the course. (CHEM-BS, BIOCHEM-BS) Seminar 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
CHEM-151 
General Chemistry
An accelerated entry-level course designed for chemistry and biochemistry majors. Topics
include measurement, atomic theory, chemical bonding and structure, stoichiometry, equilibrium and acid-base chemistry. (Corequisites: CHEM-130 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHEM-155 
Chemistry Workshop
This course presents an introduction to working in a modern chemistry laboratory. Students
will perform exercises that will aid in the understanding of general laboratory practices, atomic
and molecular structure, and Lewis acid base theory. Students will also become familiar with
keeping a scientific laboratory notebook and writing scientific abstracts. Students will also utilize modern chemical instrumentation to aid in the understanding of concepts. (Corequisites:
CHEM-151 or equivalent course.) Lab 4, Credits 2 (Fall)
CHEM-189 
Introductory Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/
Lab, Credits 1 - 3

162	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CHEM-201 
Clean Energy: Hydrogen Fuel Cells
This course focuses on clean energy sources, theories of different fuel cell operations, hydrogen infrastructure, and the introduction of devices that employ hydrogen. Principles of energy
utilization as they relate to the issues of global warming are presented. The fundamentals of
electrochemistry, acid-base reactions, organic chemistry, polymers, thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, photochemistry, and plasma chemistry will be covered to develop a foundation
for an understanding of renewable energy and hydrogen technology. Topics in the course
include technical aspects of hydrogen utilization for power generation and transportation.
Disposal schemes for by-products are also discussed. (Prerequisites: CHMG-121 or CHMG-131
or CHMG-141 or CHEM-151 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)
CHEM-203 
Clean Energy: Hydrogen Fuel Cells Laboratory
This laboratory course introduces the science of hydrogen technology and fuel cells. Students
will gain hands-on experience in hydrogen systems instrumentation assembly, building control
systems, and measuring the amount of hydrogen generated. Students will also become familiar with hydrogen sensing. (Corequisites: CHEM-201 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1
(Spring, Summer)
CHEM-289 
Intermediate Special Topics
This is an intermediate course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM-298 
Chemistry Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their first three years of study.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3
CHEM-301 
Undergraduate Teaching Experience
This course allows students to assist in a class or laboratory for which they have previously
earned credit. The student will assist the instructor in the operation of the course. Assistance by
the student may include fielding questions, helping in workshops, and assisting in review sessions. In the case of labs, students may also be asked to help with supervising safety practices,
waste manifestation, and instrumentation. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from
the department offering the course.) Lab, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM-489 
Advanced Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is
structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM-493 
Chemistry Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research in chemistry that could be considered of an original nature. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department
offering the course.) Research, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM-495 
Advanced Chemistry Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature. The
level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Research, Credits 1 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM-498 
Advanced Chemistry Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their final two years of study.
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM-499 
Chemistry Co-op
This course is a cooperative education experience for undergraduate chemistry students.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMA-161 
Quantitative Analysis
This course will introduce students to quantitative methods. The course will cover gravimetric
techniques, equilibria, statistical methods, and solution chemistry. In addition, equilibrium
for polyprotic acids, electrochemistry and potentiometry will be discussed. (COS Multi Course
Prereq&Coreq) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Science

CHMA-165 
Analytical Methods Lab
This laboratory is designed for chemistry and biochemistry majors or those interested in
pursuing a minor in chemistry. Experiments include statistics, calibration of equipment, spectroscopy, volumetric analyses, kinetics, Gran Plot, double endpoint titrations, potentiometric
titration, photometric determination of copper, and water hardness. (Prerequisites: CHEM155 or CHMG-145 or equivalent course.Corequisities: CHMA-161 or equivalent course.) Lab
6, Credits 1 (Fall)
CHMA-221 
Instrumental Analysis
This course presents a preliminary treatment of instrumental theory and technique. The course
will cover the properties of electromagnetic radiation and its interaction with matter, instrumental components, signals and noise. Specific instrumental techniques include: flame atomic
absorption; molecular ultraviolet, visible, and infrared absorption; molecular fluorescence; and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies. Students will have hands on experience with several chemical spectrometers. (Prerequisites: CHMA-161 or CHMG-142 or equivalent course.)
Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHMA-222 
Chemical Separations
This course will address current chemical separations methods, including solvent extraction,
planar chromatography, gas chromatography and various mechanisms of high performance
liquid chromatography. Current theory and applications of mass spectroscopy will also be covered. Experiments with chemical separation techniques include extractions (both solution and
solid phase), thin layer chromatography, HPLC, gel filtration, gas chromatography and mass
spectroscopy. Laboratory report writing is emphasized. (Prerequisites: CHMA-161 or CHMG142 or equivalent course.) Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHMA-231 
Chemical Instrumental Analysis for Engineers
This course presents a preliminary treatment of instrumental theory and technique as well as
hands on experience with modern chemical instrumentation. The course will cover the theory
and implementation of spectroscopic, mass spectrometric, and chemical separations instrumentation and techniques. Instrumental techniques include: atomic and molecular emission
and absorption and emission spectroscopies, atomic and molecular mass spectrometry, gas
chromatography, and high performance liquid chromatography. Students will perform experiments utilizing modern chemical instrumentation and gain experience in analyzing data and
presenting results experimental results. (Prerequisites: CHMA-161 or CHMG-142 or equivalent.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Spring)
CHMB-189 
Introductory Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/
Lab, Credits 1 - 3
CHMB-240 
Biochemistry for Health Sciences
This course will focus on the application of biochemical knowledge to the field of medicine.
Students will learn the basic functions of water, carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic
acids in humans, then explore implications of this knowledge in nutrition and metabolism
and its relationship to health and disease. (Prerequisites: CHMG-142 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHMB-289 
Intermediate Special Topics
This is an intermediate course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/
Lab, Credits 1 - 3
CHMB-402 
Biochemistry I
This course introduces the structure and function of biological macromolecules and their metabolic pathways. The relationship between the three-dimensional structure of proteins and their
function in enzymatic catalysis will be examined. Membrane structure and the physical laws
that apply to metabolic processes will also be discussed. (Prerequisite: CHMO-231 or CHMO331 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMB-403 
Biochemistry II
The course begins with in-depth studies of the metabolism of lipids, amino acids and nucleotides. Studies on metabolism will conclude with an exploration of the integration and hormonal
control of metabolic processes in humans. The course will then focus on nucleic acid structures,
including both DNA and RNA. Nucleic acid metabolism and the flow of genetic information
including replication of DNA, its transcription into RNA, and the translation of messenger
RNA into protein are presented. RNA biochemistry including ribozyme structure and function, RNA interference, and riboswitches are described. Other topics may include genomics,
telomeres and telomerase, and DNA repair. (Prerequisites: CHMB-402 and (CHMO-232 or
CHMO-332) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

CHMB-405 
Biochemistry Lab
An introduction to the theory and practice of modern experimental biochemical laboratory
techniques and concepts. The weekly two-hour lecture provides a theoretical framework for
the course and includes a discussion of the properties of biomolecules and how those properties are exploited in the separation and characterization of the molecules. Practical laboratory
techniques include the preparation of buffers, centrifugation, chromatography, electrophoretic
methods, and UV-visible spectrophotometry as applied to the isolation and characterization of
proteins and nucleic acids. The manipulation of genetic material in E. coli will also be executed. This course will be offered in a writing intensive format where the students will write and
submit the different sections found in scientific papers (abstract, introduction, materials and
methods, results, discussion, conclusions, references, figures, tables) in an iterative fashion
that will include regular feedback from the instructor. (Prerequisites: CHMB-402 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHMB-450 
Biochemistry of Infectious Disease
This course investigates the biochemical mechanisms of pathogenesis of bacterial, viral, and
other microbial infectious agents. This course also covers the historical, social, and cultural
impact that these infectious diseases have had on society. Topics may include: antibiotics
and antibiotic resistance, vaccines, gut microflora and health, foodborne illnesses, bioterrorism, HIV, tuberculosis, malaria, and staph infections. (Prerequisites: CHMB-402 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHMB-489 
Advanced Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is
structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 - 3
CHMB-493 
Biochemistry Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research in biochemistry that could be
considered of an original nature. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the
department offering the course.) Research, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMB-495 
Advanced Biochemistry Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature. The
level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Research, Credits 1 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMB-498 
Advanced Biochemistry Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their final two years of study. (This
course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 3
CHMB-499 
Biochemistry Co-op
This course is a cooperative education experience for undergraduate biochemistry students.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMG-111 
General-Organic-Biochemistry I
This course is a foundations course in chemistry; no chemistry background is required.
Fundamentals include: dimensional analysis; matter and energy; atomic theory; molecular
structure; chemical bonding; chemical reactions; solution chemistry, states of matter, reaction
rates, equilibrium, and acid/base chemistry. The lecture is complemented by hands-on laboratory exercises with workshop-style problem sessions in which the student will gain experience
with basic laboratory techniques: gravimetric, volumetric, thermal and titration analyses, and
use these techniques to analyze chemical reactions. The course material will emphasize the
relationship between chemistry and modern sociological, nutritional and environmental issues.
Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
CHMG-112 
General-Organic-Biochemistry II
The course covers the foundations of organic chemistry and biochemistry. Fundamentals
include organic nomenclature and structure, functional groups including alcohols, carbonyls, amines, and organic reactions. The course then applies functional group chemistry to
the study of carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids and proteins. The lecture is complemented
by laboratory exercises in which the student will gain experienced with organic laboratory
techniques. Methods of separating, purifying, and characterizing organic compounds are covered. The lecture/lab course will familiarize students with the relationship between organic
chemistry, biochemistry, and modern pharmaceutical, nutritional and environmental issues.
(Prerequisites: CHMG-111 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

163

College of Science

CHMG-122 
Chemistry of Water and Wastewater
This course addresses the chemistry of water and its analysis, which includes: pH; alkalinity;
acidity; fluoride; chloride; phosphate; biochemical oxygen demand; chemical oxygen demand,
nitrogen; metals; radioactivity; residual chloride; chlorine demand; measurement of solid matter in industrial wastes and sludges; and trace contaminants. (Prerequisites: CHMG-121 or
CHMG-131 or CHMG-141 or equivalent courses.) Lab 2, Recitation 1, Lecture 2, Credits
3 (Fall)
CHMG-123 
Chemistry of Materials
The course will address three fundamental concepts of general chemistry by covering three
aspects of all chemical reactions: kinetics, equilibrium and thermodynamics. Acid/base and
oxidation/reductions will be discussed. The chemistry of metals, ceramics and synthetic polymers will be covered, including electrochemistry and a brief overview of organic chemistry.
(Prerequisites: CHMG-121 or CHMG-131 or CHMG-141 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture
2, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHMG-131 
General Chemistry for Engineers
This rigorous course is primarily for, but not limited to, engineering students. Topics include an
introduction to some basic concepts in chemistry, stoichiometry, First Law of Thermodynamics,
thermochemistry, electronic theory of composition and structure, and chemical bonding. The
lecture is supported by workshop-style problem sessions. Offered in traditional and online format. Lecture 2, Recitation 1, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHMG-141 
General and Analytical Chemistry I
This is a general chemistry course for students in the life and physical sciences. College chemistry is presented as a science based on empirical evidence that is placed into the context of
conceptual, visual, and mathematical models. Students will learn the concepts, symbolism, and
fundamental tools of chemistry necessary to carry on a discourse in the language of chemistry.
Emphasis will be placed on the relationship between atomic structure, chemical bonds, and the
transformation of these bonds through chemical reactions. The fundamentals of organic chemistry are introduced throughout the course to emphasize the connection between chemistry and
the other sciences. (Co-requisites: CHMG-145 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Recitation 1,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMG-142 
General and Analytical Chemistry II
The course covers the thermodynamics and kinetics of chemical reactions. The relationship
between energy and entropy change as the driving force of chemical processes is emphasized
through the study of aqueous solutions. Specifically, the course takes a quantitative look at:
1) solubility equilibrium, 2) acid-base equilibrium, 3) oxidation-reduction reactions and 4)
chemical kinetics. (Prerequisites: CHMG-141 or equivalent course.Corequisites: CHMG-146
Lab.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMG-145 
General and Analytical Chemistry I Lab
The course combines hands-on laboratory exercises with workshop-style problem sessions to
complement the CHMG-141 lecture material. The course emphasizes laboratory techniques and
data analysis skills. Topics include: gravimetric, volumetric, thermal, titration and spectrophotometric analyses, and the use of these techniques to analyze chemical reactions. (Corequisite:
CHMG-141 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMG-146 
General and Analytical Chemistry II Lab
The course combines hands-on laboratory exercises with workshop-style problem sessions to
complement the CHMG-142 lecture material. The course emphasizes the use of experiments as
a tool for chemical analysis and the reporting of results in formal lab reports. Topics include the
quantitative analysis of a multicomponent mixture using complexation and double endpoint
titration, pH measurement, buffers and pH indicators, the kinetic study of a redox reaction,
and the electrochemical analysis of oxidation reduction reactions. (Prerequisites: CHMG-141
and CHMG-145 or equivalent course.Corequisites: CHMG-142 or equivalent course.) Lab 3,
Credits 1 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMG-201 
Introduction to Organic Polymer Technology
The first part of the course covers the fundamentals of organic chemistry. The organization,
nomenclature, structure, bonding and basic reactions of organic compounds will be discussed,
in particular those concepts that are relevant to understand polymer chemistry. The second
part of the course will introduce the nomenclature and classification of synthetic polymers. The
reactions leading to the formation of relevant polymers, their chemical and physical behavior,
and some of their many applications will be discussed. (Prerequisites: CHMG-121 or CHMG131 or CHMG-141 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHMI-351 
Descriptive Inorganic Chemistry
This course covers descriptive inorganic reactions in terms of periodic trends. Topics will
include nucleosynthesis and the birth of the universe, applications used in large-scale industrial processes and their environmental impacts, nanostructured materials, and bonding theory
will also be discussed. A detailed study of solid-state chemistry and structure will also be
addressed. (Prerequisite: CHMO-231 or CHMO-331 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

164	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

CHMI-464 
Structural Inorganic Chemistry
This course will teach students how the properties of inorganic materials are explained by
current theories including group theory, molecular orbital theory, acid-base chemistry and
coordination structure and function, and coordination chemistry. The topics discussed in this
course are coordination nomenclature, isomerization, symmetry, molecular orbital theory,
metallic bonding, ionic bonding, crystal and ligand field theory. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHMI-565 
Preparative Inorganic Chemistry Lab
This course provides a laboratory environment for students to learn the strategies necessary
to synthesize a wide variety of inorganic compounds and organometallic complexes. Students
will learn how to plan and develop synthetic protocols in both atmospheric and inert reaction processes. This course is intended to give an opportunity to develop innovative skills and
writing proficiency. Library, literature and textbook research will be required. (Prerequisites:
CHMI-351 or equivalent course.) Lab 8, Recitation, Credits 2 (Spring)
CHMO-231 
Organic Chemistry I
This course is a study of the structure, nomenclature, reactions and synthesis of the following
functional groups: alkanes, alkenes, alkynes. This course also introduces chemical bonding,
IR and NMR spectroscopy, acid and base reactions, stereochemistry, nucleophilic substitution
reactions, and alkene and alkyne reactions. In addition, the course provides an introduction to
the use of mechanisms in describing and predicting organic reactions. (Prerequisites: CHMG142 or equivalent course.Corequisites: CHMO-235 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMO-232 
Organic Chemistry II
This course is a continuation of the study of the structure, nomenclature, reactions and synthesis of the following functional groups: aromatic systems, alcohols, ethers, epoxides, and
carbonyls. This course will introduce the use of mechanisms in describing and predicting
organic reactions. (Prerequisites: CHMO-231 or CHMO-331 or equivalent course.Corequisites:
CHMO-236 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHMO-235 
Organic Chemistry Lab I
This course trains students to perform techniques important in an organic chemistry lab. The
course also covers reactions from the accompanying lecture CHMO-231. (Corequisite: CHMO231 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHMO-236 
Organic Chemistry Lab II
This course teaches students to apply basic lab techniques to organic synthetic experiments
reactions covered in the accompanying lecture COS-CHMO-232. This course will also help students to solidify the concepts taught in lecture. The course will continue to instruct students
in maintaining a professional lab notebook. (Prerequisites: CHMO-235 or equivalent course.
Corequisites: CHMO-232 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
CHMO-331 
Comprehensive Organic Chemistry I
This course is a rigorous study of the structure, nomenclature, reactions and synthesis of the
following functional groups: alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes. The course will also provide an
introduction to chemical bonding, IR and NMR spectroscopy, acid and base reactions, stereochemistry, nucleophilic substitution reactions, alkene, and alkyne reactions. This course will
require the use of mechanisms in describing and predicting organic reactions. (Prerequisites:
CHEM-151 or equivalent course.Corequisites: CHMO-335 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
CHMO-332 
Comprehensive Organic Chemistry II
This course is a comprehensive study of the structure, reactions and synthesis of the following
functional groups: aromatic rings, ketones, aldehydes, and carboxylic acids and their derivatives. Students will apply their knowledge from CHMO-331 to predict products and derive
mechanisms that describe various organic reactions. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
CHMO-335 
Comprehensive Organic Chemistry Lab I
This course prepares students to perform techniques important in an organic chemistry lab
and to carryout reactions covered in the accompanying lecture CHMO-331. (Corequisites:
CHMO-331 or equivalent course.) Lab 4, Credits 1 (Spring)
CHMO-336 
Comprehensive Organic Chemistry Lab II
This course teaches students to perform techniques important in an organic chemistry lab and
reactions covered in the accompanying lecture CHMO-332. This course will also help students
to solidify the concepts taught in lecture and perform qualitative analysis of unknown compounds. (Prerequisites: CHMO-335 or equvialent course.Corequisites: CHMO-332 or equivalent
course.) Lab 4, Credits 2 (Fall)

College of Science

CHMO-535 
Advanced Techniques in Organic Synthesis
This advanced lab course teaches students to perform advanced techniques important in an
organic chemistry lab. Techniques covered include working under inert atmospheres, working with air-sensitive reagents, using syringes, purification methods, and carrying on material
for subsequent synthetic steps. Characterization of synthesized compounds will be conducted.
(Prerequisites: CHMO-336 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
CHMP-441 
Physical Chemistry I
This course provides fundamental concepts, and organizing principles, applied in all aspects
of chemistry and related fields. A rigorous and detailed explanation of central, unifying concepts in thermodynamics and chemical kinetics will be developed. Mathematical models that
provide quantitative predictions will be described for thermodynamics and chemical kinetics.
These contain the mathematical underpinnings to concepts applied in analytical, inorganic,
organic, and biochemistry courses, as well as more advanced topics in chemistry. The course
will cover: gases, temperature, energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics, entropy and
the Second and Third laws, Helmholtz and Gibbs free energies, criteria for equilibrium and
spontaneity, chemical equilibrium, electrochemistry, kinetic molecular theory and chemical kinetics. (Prerequisites: CHMA-221 and PHYS-112 or PHYS-212 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
CHMP-442 
Physical Chemistry II
This course provides fundamental concepts, and organizing principles of quantum chemistry, applied in all aspects of chemistry and related fields. A rigorous and detailed explanation
of central, unifying concepts in quantum chemistry will be developed. Mathematical models
will be described, which contain the underpinnings to concepts applied in analytical, inorganic, organic, and biochemistry courses, as well as more advanced topics in chemistry. The
course will cover: Postulates and formulation of Schrödinger equations, Operators and matrix
elements, Solutions for the particle-in-a-box, simple harmonic oscillators, the rigid rotor and
angular momentum, the hydrogen atom; spin, the Pauli principle. Approximation methods
will be described for the helium atom, the hydrogen molecule ion, the hydrogen molecule,
Diatomic molecules. Linear combinations of atomic orbitals and computational chemistry will
be introduced and quantum chemistry applications will be provided. In addition this course
will cover standard thermodynamic functions expressed in partition functions and spectroscopy and light-matter interaction (Prerequisite: CHMP-441 and (MATH-233 or (MATH-231
and MATH-241)) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
CHMP-445 
Experimental Physical Chemistry
An advanced laboratory course on the use of wet chemical and instrumental analysis to
apply, test and formulate physical and mathematical models to explain chemical phenomena. Emphasis is placed on formulating a scientific argument, supported by experimental
evidence and established theories, and presented in a formal technical report. Writing Intensive
(Prerequisites: CHMP-441 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 7, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

Environmental Science
ENVS-101 
Concepts of Environmental Science
This course is the foundation course for the Environmental Science major and presents an
integrated approach to the interrelated, interdisciplinary principles of environmental science
through lecture, case studies and active participation. In this course, the focus will be on sustainability as the foundation for problem solving while investigating a number of environmental
issues and establishing environmental literacy. Topics may include biodiversity, ecosystems,
pollution, energy, and global climate change. To demonstrate the interdisciplinary methodology
of environmental science, elements of government/political science/policy, ethics, economics,
sociology, history and engineering are embedded in the scientific matrix used to present this
course. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENVS-111 
Soil Science
This is an introductory course on soil science, covering concepts such as soil taxonomy, soil
ecology, physical soil properties, soil formation and geomorphology, and soil conservation. The
lecture portion of the course will consist of in-class demonstrations and exercises, discussion
groups, and traditional lecture materials. Lab exercises will focus on field sampling techniques
and bench analyses, soil texture and partial size analyses, basic soil chemistry properties, land
use planning, and spatial analyses. Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
ENVS-150 
Ecology of the Dalmatian Coast
This course is an introduction to population, community, and ecosystem ecology; stressing
the dynamic interrelationships of plant and animal communities of the Dalmatian Coast. The
course includes such ecological concepts as energy flow and trophic levels in natural communities, population and community dynamics, biogeography and ecosystem ecology. Field trips
to local Croatian ecosystems are included. Lab 2, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)

	

ENVS-151 
Scientific Inquiries in Environmental Science
This course is part of a two-semester sequence that when combined presents an integrated
approach to the interrelated, interdisciplinary principles of environmental science through case
studies, site visits, and field work. Through assigned readings, classroom discussion and case
studies dealing with global environmental issues as well as the environmental issues related to
the Dalmatian coast, students will learn how to critically analyze environmental problems from
a multidisciplinary perspective and to propose solutions. Lab 2, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)
ENVS-189 
Introductory Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-201 
Environmental Workshop
This workshop serves as the second core course for the Environmental Science major. Through
in-class exercises, outside labs, and field trips, students will begin to learn problem solving and
analytical skills needed to investigate and address environmental issues. Topics may include
assessing campus biodiversity and ecosystems, calculating personal and campus ecological
footprints and sustainability indexes, environmental modeling, and campus sustainability projects. To demonstrate the interdisciplinary methodology of environmental science, elements of
government/political science/policy, ethics, economics, sociology, and history are embedded
in the scientific matrix used to present this course. (Prerequisites: ENVS-101 or STSO-220 or
equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENVS-205 
Biology of Bird Banding
This course is designed to prepare the student to safely band passerine species of birds and
to safely engage in research using banding methods. Important topics of avian biology are
introduced. The course is also designed to meet requirements of the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service and the North American Banding Council for banders and for bander training. This course constitutes the first step toward obtaining a USFWS permit to band birds and
to conduct avian conservation research. (Prerequisites: BIOL-122 or equivalent course.) Lab
2, Lecture 1, Credits 2 (Fall)
ENVS-241 
Earth Systems Dynamics
This course is a general elective offering that will expose students to earth systems dynamics, i.e.,
the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, and terrestrial components, and their interactions
at a global scale. The course also offers introductions to regional and local scale interactions,
as well as societal impacts, e.g., science, engineering, policy, and economics. This course will
provide students with the critical thinking skills to evaluate the underlying science of system
components, how they fluctuate, interact via feedback loops, their carbon and energy dynamics, and what this means for society as a whole. Special focus will be given to remote sensing
methods for assessing global system dynamics, including satellite image analysis. This offering
will include theoretical background, guest lecturers, and class discussion centered on prominent topics, e.g., climate change and the science behind this. (AL2-DegS) Lab 2, Lecture 2,
Credits 3 (Fall)
ENVS-242H 
Sustainability of Regional Ecosystems
In this course we investigate regional system dynamics in context terrestrial, atmospheric,
and hydrological components, their interactions at various scales, and their impacts on a set
of human (societal) endeavors. These endeavors include economic, engineering, and social
activities. We develop case studies at the regional scale, e.g., fuel wood resources in Africa,
and local scale, e.g., vineyard farming in upstate New York, and discuss how these systems
impact our society. We assess peer-review literature to gain a better understanding of system
dynamics and evaluate geospatial approaches, e.g., remote sensing and geographic information systems (GIS), as tools with which to monitor these regional systems. To this end we give
special focus to remote sensing methods for assessing the sustainability of human-ecosystems
interactions, specifically in terms of our extraction of ecosystem services such as clean water,
clean air, food, shelter, recreation, etc. The course will include theoretical background, guest
lecturers, and current scientific readings. (This class is restricted to students in the Honors program or students with at least 2nd year student standing.) Lab 2, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
ENVS-275 
Ecology of Hunting and Fishing
This course will present the historical and current ecology of humans as predators on other
species of animals. The course will examine the purposes, costs and benefits, methods, sustainability, and ethics of hunting and fishing. Further, there will be opportunities to learn
about major ecological concepts including predation, competition, keystone species, trophic
cascades, and causes of extinction. The cultural importance and roles of hunting and fishing
in conservation and their impact on the relationships among human populations will also be
examined. This course will be of particular interest for persons who are interested in fish and
wildlife, ecology, anthropology, or who plan to work in conservation, environmental science,
or natural resource occupations. (AL2-DegS) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

165

College of Science

ENVS-289 
Intermediate Special Topics
This is an intermediate course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-295 
Environmental Science Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature.
The level of study is appropriate for students in their first three years of study. (This course
requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Research, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-298 
Environmental Science Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their first three years of study.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits
1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-301 
Environmental Science Field Skills
Environmental Science Field Skills presents an integrated approach to the interrelated, interdisciplinary principles of environmental science through case studies, site visits and field work.
In this course, the focus will be on learning methods for environmental analysis, including
experimental design, water and soil quality, primary production and biodiversity, land use/
land cover change and ecosystem restoration. The course will culminate in a stressed stream
analysis of a local watershed. Additional topics may include geographic information systems,
wetlands, environmental education and sustainable food production. The interdisciplinary
nature of environmental science will be illustrated through elements of government/political
science/policy, ethics, economics, sociology, history and engineering. (Prerequisites: ENVS201 and CHMG-141 and BIOL-122 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 3, Credits 4 (Spring)
ENVS-311 Wetlands
This is a course on the interactions of vegetation, soils, and hydrology that characterize wetlands. Ecosystem characteristics and processes are emphasized. Wetland policies, regulations,
classification, and value systems are also covered. Field work and hands-on learning are integrated into the course through projects and field trips. (Prerequisites: BIOL-240 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 4 (Fall)
ENVS-450 
Hydrologic Applications of Geographic Information Systems
Aerial photography, satellite imagery, Global Positioning Systems (GPS), and Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) are extremely useful tools in hydrologic modeling and environmental applications such as rainfall runoff modeling, pollution loading, landscape change
analyses, and terrain modeling. This course will: 1) introduce students to spatial analysis theories, techniques and issues associated with hydrologic and environmental applications; 2)
provide hands-on training in the use of these spatial tools and models while addressing a real
problem; 3) provide experience linking GIS and model results to field assessments and monitoring activities; and 4) enable students to solve a variety of spatial and temporal hydrologic
and environmental problems. (Prerequisites: ENVS-250 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab
6, Credits 4 (Spring)
ENVS-489 
Advanced Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (Academic Level 3, Degree Seeking students.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 4
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-495 
Advanced Environmental Science Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory or field work,
computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature.
The level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study. (This course
requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Research, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-498 
Advanced Environmental Science Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their final two years of study.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits
1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENVS-499 
Environmental Science Co-op
Cooperative education experience for undergraduate environmental science students. Co-op,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

166	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ENVS-551 
Environmental Science Capstone Seminar I
This course brings together all of the principles of Environmental Science the student has
learned during his/her four year undergraduate education at RIT. To accomplish this, students
will work in teams to provide solutions to a real environmental problem or issue. In addition
to working with RIT faculty, the students will work with practicing environmental scientists
and the public. This first course will focus on problem definition, developing a problem solving strategy, and begin data collection and background analyses. Students will present their
preliminary findings to the client through presentations and status reports. (This course is
restricted to 4th year students in the ENVS-BS, ENVS-2M and ENVS-MN programs.) Lecture/
Lab 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ENVS-552 
Environmental Science Capstone Seminar II
This course continues to bring together all of the principles of Environmental Science the student has learned during his/her four year undergraduate education at RIT as the follow-up to
the first capstone course. Students will work in teams to provide solutions to a real environmental problem or issue. In addition to working with RIT faculty, the students will work with
practicing environmental scientists and the public. This second course will focus on refining the
methodology and strategy proposed to address the environmental issue, continue data collection and background analyses, interpret results, and propose solutions to the assigned problem.
Students will generate a final report and present their findings to the clients. (Prerequisites:
ENVS-551 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

General Science
GSCI-101 
Science Exploration I
This course prepares students within the College of Science for choosing a major through an
intensive, team-based research project. The project is selected each year by the faculty and
is presented to the class as a goal. The students will self-organize into groups, define group
sub-goals, conduct research, communicate their results on a weekly basis, and integrate the
modules into a final, complete research paper that is presented at the end of the second term.
Students will be graded on their teamwork, individual and group creativity, scientific rigor,
thoroughness of supporting research results, and the overall quality of the final research paper.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
GSCI-102 
Science Exploration II
This course continues to prepare students within the College of Science for choosing a major
through an intensive, team-based research project. The project is selected each year by the
faculty and is presented to the class as a goal. The students will self-organize into groups,
define group sub-goals, conduct research, communicate their results on a weekly basis, and
integrate the modules into a final, complete research paper that is presented at the end of the
third term. Students will be graded on their teamwork, individual and group creativity, scientific rigor, thoroughness of supporting research results, and the overall quality of the final
research paper. Students will present a formal project report at the end of the term to faculty
and staff. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Imaging Science
IMGS-111 
Imaging Science Fundamentals
This course is an exploration of the fundamentals of imaging science and the imaging systems
of the past, present, and future. Imaging systems studied include the human visual system,
consumer and entertainment applications (e.g., traditional and digital photography, television,
digital television, HDTV, and virtual reality); medical applications (e.g., X-ray, ultrasound,
and MRI); business/document applications (e.g., impact and non-impact printing, scanners,
printers, fax machines, and copiers) and systems used in remote sensing and astronomy (e.g.,
night-vision systems, ground- and satellite-based observatories). The laboratory component
reinforces the principles and theories discussed in the lecture, while giving students experience with many imaging systems and exposure to the underlying scientific principles. Lab 3,
Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-112 
Astronomical Imaging Fundamentals
This course familiarizes students with the goals and techniques of astronomical imaging. The
broad nature of astronomical sources will be outlined, in terms of requirements on astronomical
imaging systems. These requirements are then investigated in the context of the astronomical imaging chain. Imaging chains in the optical, X-ray, radio, and/ or other wavelengths will
be studied in detail. Laboratory assignments will range from construction and characterization of a hand-held telescope to analysis of astronomical images. (Prerequisites: IMGS-111 or
equivalent course.IMGS-111 Prereq) Lab, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

College of Science

IMGS-180 
Introduction to Computing and Control
This hands-on course is an introduction to computer programming, simple electronics, and
the control of electronic devices using commercially available, single-board computers (e.g.
Raspberry Pi). Emphasis will be placed on utilizing the analog and digital input/output ports
available on these single-board computers to control and acquire data from electronic devices
like optical detectors, LED sources, and servo-motors. The use of open-source software libraries
to assist in the control and real-time acquisition of image data from peripheral imaging devices
and cameras will be covered in detail. The student will be introduced to object-oriented programming using Python. Fundamentals of flow control, object types and creation, input/output,
and problem-solving approaches such as the use of randomness, divide-and-conquer, Monte
Carlo, and search will be examined in detail and applied to scientific, mathematical, and imaging-specific related problems. (IMGS-BS, DIGCIME-BS) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

IMGS-241 
Earth System Dynamics I
This course is the first of a two-course sequence, general elective offering that will expose students to earth systems dynamics, i.e., the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, and terrestrial
components, and their interactions at a global scale. The course also offers introductions to
regional and local scale interactions, as well as societal impacts, e.g., science, engineering,
policy, and economics. This course will provide students with the critical thinking skills to
evaluate the underlying science of system components, how they fluctuate, interact, and what
this means for society as a whole. This will include theoretical background, guest lecturers,
class discussion centered on prominent topics, e.g., global warming and the science behind
this, and a class project that focuses on global scale interactions and their relevance to scientific, engineering, social, and economic endeavors. (This class is restricted to undergraduate
students with at least 2nd year standing.) Lab, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)

IMGS-181 
Innovative Freshman Experience I
Innovative Freshman Experience I is the first of a two-course sequence. Through the exploration
of concepts in physics, math, and computer science, students will experience the creation of a
system to address a contemporary technological need through the application of the principles
of the scientific method. With the help of faculty and staff from different departments across
campus, as well as external experts, students will plan and organize the effort, review current
literature applicable to the posed technical challenge, apply hypotheses to address presented
scientific questions, conduct experiments to assess technology options, integrate components
to create a prototype, and confirm that the prototype and methods meet desired levels of performance. The students will develop a working knowledge of the scientific method and an
appreciation for the value of teamwork in technical disciplines, develop the skills required to
execute a large project, and increase proficiency in oral and written technical communication.
(Academic Level 1, Degree Seeking students.) Lecture/Lab, Credits 3 (Fall)

IMGS-242H 
Sustainability of Regional Ecosystems
In this course we investigate regional system dynamics in context terrestrial, atmospheric,
and hydrological components, their interactions at various scales, and their impacts on a set
of human (societal) endeavors. These endeavors include economic, engineering, and social
activities. We develop case studies at the regional scale, e.g., fuel wood resources in Africa,
and local scale, e.g., vineyard farming in upstate New York, and discuss how these systems
impact our society. We assess peer-review literature to gain a better understanding of system
dynamics and evaluate geospatial approaches, e.g., remote sensing and geographic information systems (GIS), as tools with which to monitor these regional systems. To this end we give
special focus to remote sensing methods for assessing the sustainability of human-ecosystems
interactions, specifically in terms of our extraction of ecosystem services such as clean water,
clean air, food, shelter, recreation, etc. The course will include theoretical background, guest
lecturers, and current scientific readings. (This class is restricted to students in the Honors program or students with at least 2nd year student standing.) Lab 2, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

IMGS-182 
Innovative Freshman Experience II
This is the second of a two-course sequence aimed at designing, developing, and building a
functional imaging system that will be useful to a real world external constituency to achieve
its technical goals. With help from faculty and staff from imaging science and other departments across campus, the unified team of students will plan and organize the effort, assess
technology options, integrate components, and confirm that the system meets desired levels
of performance. Students will develop a general understanding of the foundational concepts of
imaging science, a working knowledge of the principles of systems engineering, an appreciation for the value of teamwork in technical disciplines and practice oral and written technical
communication. In this second course of the sequence, students proceed with construction
and testing of their system that was designed in IMGS-181. (IMGS Multiple Course Prereq 1)
Lecture/Lab 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-189 
Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IMGS-211 
Probability and Statistics for Imaging
This course introduces the principles of probability and statistics that are used in imaging
science. The first half of the course covers probability distributions for discrete and continuous random variables, expectation, variance, and joint distributions. The second half of the
course will consider point estimation, statistical intervals, hypothesis testing, inference, and
linear regression. (Prerequisites: MATH-182 or MATH-173 or equivalent course.Co-requisites:
MATH-221 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-221 
Vision and Psychophysics
This course presents an overview of the organization and function of the human visual system
and some of the psychophysical techniques used to study visual perception. (Prerequisites:
SOFA-103 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-230H 
The New Music of the Spheres
This course traces human understanding of resonances and their significance — from the ideas
of Pythagoras and Kepler concerning the potential relationships between musical intervals
and planetary motion (the "Music of the Spheres"), to the work of contemporary astronomers
discovering and characterizing planets orbiting other stars (“exoplanets”). Along the way,
essential methods, discoveries, and recent developments in the study of our own solar system
and exoplanets — including theories for and observations of the origins of planetary systems
-are investigated, as are the physical and mathematical concepts necessary to describe sound,
light, & gravity. (Prerequisites: PHYS-112 or 1017-213 or PHYS-212 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

	

IMGS-251 Radiometry
This course introduces the concepts of quantitative measurement of electromagnetic energy.
The basic radiometric and photometric terms are introduced using calculus-based definitions.
Governing equations for source propagation and sensor output are derived. Simple source concepts are reviewed and detector figures of merit are introduced and used in problem solving.
The radiometric concepts are then applied to simple imaging systems so that a student could
make quantitative measurements with imaging instruments. (Prerequisites: MATH-182 and
PHYS-212 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-261 
Linear and Fourier Methods for Imaging
This course develops the concepts of complex numbers and linear algebra for describing imaging systems in the frequency domain via the discrete and continuous Fourier transforms.
(Prerequisites: MATH-182 or equivalent course.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Spring)
IMGS-321 
Geometric Optics
This course introduces the analysis and design of optical imaging systems based on the ray model of light. Topics include reflection, refraction, imaging with lenses, stops and pupils, prisms,
magnification and optical system design using computer software. (Prerequisites: PHYS-212
or PHYS-208 and 209 or equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-341 
Interactions Between Light and Matter
This course introduces the principles of how light interacts with matter. The principles of
atomic physics as applied to simple atoms are reviewed and extended to multi-electron atoms
to interpret their spectra. Molecular structure and spectra are covered in depth, including the
principles of lasers. The concepts of statistical physics concepts are introduced and applied
to the structure of crystalline solids, their band structure and optical properties. These concepts are then used to understand electronic imaging devices, such as detectors. (Prerequisites:
PHYS-213 or equivalent course. Students in the PHYS-BS program must also complete PHYS275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-351 
Fundamentals of Color Science
This course will introduce students to the field of Color Science. Students will learn about the
physical sources of color, the visual mechanisms that provide our experience of color, and the
descriptive systems that have been developed for relating the physical and visual properties.
Through hands-on projects, students will learn practical methods for measuring, modeling, and
controlling color in digital imaging systems. (Prerequisites: IMGS-180 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-362 
Image Processing and Computer Vision II
This course is considers the more advanced concepts of digital image processing. The topics
include image reconstruction, noise sources and techniques for noise removal, information theory, image compression, video compression, wavelet transformations, frequency-domain based
applications, morphological operations, and modern digital image watermarking and steganography algorithms. Emphasis is placed on applications and efficient algorithmic implementation
using the student’s computer programming language of choice, technical presentation, and
technical writing. (Prerequisites: IMGS-361 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

167

College of Science

IMGS-371 
Imaging Systems Analysis
This course will introduce students to the theory and practice of imaging systems analysis.
Students will learn about the physical factors that affect the spatial and temporal response properties of optical, electronic, and biological imaging systems, and the mathematical methods
that have been developed for describing these properties. Through hands-on projects, students
will learn practical methods for measuring, modeling, and controlling the spatial and temporal
point spread functions (PSFs) and modulation transfer functions (MTFs) of imaging systems.
(COS-IMGS-180 and COS-IMGS-261, or equivalent) (Prerequisites: IMGS-180 and IMGS-261
or equivalent courses.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall)
IMGS-433 
Remote Sensing Systems Engineering
This course develops knowledge and understanding of the design and analysis of optical remote
sensing systems for Earth remote sensing. Building on general imaging fundamentals learned
earlier in their program, students will learn domain-specific tools and techniques for analyzing
airborne and satellite sensor systems for the optical spectral imaging of Earth. Through a combination of classroom and laboratory experiences, students will learn about the propagation
of photons and signals from the Sun through the formation of a digital image. The course will
emphasize a linear systems modeling perspective and provide the students the background to
understand, model, and predict remote sensing imaging system performance. (Prerequisites:
IMGS-251 and IMGS-441 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-441 
Noise and System Modeling
This course develops the concepts of noise modeling and random processes within the context of imaging systems. After a brief review of probability theory, the concept of image noise
is introduced. Random processes are considered in both the spatial and spatial frequency
domains, with emphasis on the autocorrelation function and power density spectrum. Finally,
the principles of random processes are applied to signal and noise transfer in multistage imaging systems. At the completion of the course the student will be able to model signal and noise
transfer within a multistage imaging system. (Prerequisites: (IMGS-211 or MATH-251) and
IMGS-261 and IMGS-341 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-451 
Imaging Detectors
This course provides an overview of the underlying physical concepts, designs, and characteristics of detectors used to sense electromagnetic radiation having wavelengths ranging from
as short as X-rays to as long as millimeter radiation. The basic physical concepts common to
many standard detector arrays will be reviewed. Some specific examples of detectors to be
discussed include photomultipliers, micro channel plates, hybridized infrared arrays, positive-intrinsic-negative (PIN) detectors, and superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS)
mixers. The use of detectors in fields such as astronomy, high energy physics, medical imaging
and digital imaging will be discussed. (Prerequisites: IMGS-251 and IMGS-341 or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-461 
Multi-Wavelength Astronomical Imaging
Multi-wavelength Astronomical Imaging will survey multi-wavelength astronomical observing
techniques and instrumentation. Students will gain an understanding of how the telescopes,
detectors, and instrumentation in the major ground-based and space-based observatories
function and how to use them. Observatories to be studied include the Very Large Array, GBT,
ALMA, Spitzer, HST, Gemini, JWST, and Chandra. Students will plan and carry out a multiwavelength archival program on a topic of their choice. (Prerequisites: PHYS-213 or equivalent
course. Students in the PHYS-BS program must also complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-462 
Multivariate Statistical Image Processing
This course discusses the digital image processing concepts and algorithms used for the analysis of hyperspectral, multispectral, and multi-channel data in multiple imaging application
areas. Concepts are covered at the theoretical and implementation level using current, popular commercial software packages and high-level programming languages to work examples,
homework problems and programming assignments. The requisite multivariate statistics will
be presented as part of this course as an extension of the univariate statistics that the students have previously been exposed to in the introductory statistics classes. Topics include
methods for supervised data classification, clustering algorithms and unsupervised classification, multispectral data transformations, data-redundancy reduction techniques, derivation
of non-spectral images features to aid in the classification process, and data fusion for resolution enhancement. (Prerequisites: IMGS-362 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
IMGS-495 
Advanced Imaging Science Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, image analysis, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an
original nature. The level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study.
(This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Research, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

168	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

IMGS-499 
Imaging Science Co-op
This course is a cooperative education experience for undergraduate imaging science students.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
IMGS-502 
Imaging Science Senior Project I
Students perform the independent research project defined in the proposal developed in IMGS401. The project is supervised by a faculty member in imaging science and is expected to require
9-12 hours per week. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Independent
Study 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-503 
Imaging Science Senior Project II
Students perform the independent research project defined in the proposal developed in IMGS502. The project is supervised by a faculty member in imaging science. The student presents
the results of the project to a public meeting. (This course requires permission of the Instructor
to enroll.) Independent Study, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-528 
Design and Fabrication of a Solid State Camera
The purpose of this course is to provide the student with hands-on experience in building a CCD
camera. The course provides the basics of CCD operation including an overview, CCD clocking,
analog output circuitry, cooling, and evaluation criteria. (This course is restricted to students
with at least 4th year standing in the IMGS-BS program.) Lab 6, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-532 
Advanced Environmental Applications of Remote Sensing
This course will focus on a broader selection of analytical techniques with an application-centric
presentation. These techniques include narrow-band indices, filtering in the spatial and frequency domains, principal component analysis, textural analysis, hybrid and object-oriented
classifiers, change detection methods, and structural analysis. All of these techniques are applied
to assessment of natural resources. Sensing modalities include imaging spectroscopy (hyperspectral), multispectral, and light detection and ranging (lidar) sensors. Applications such as
vegetation stress assessment, foliar biochemistry, advanced image classification for land use
purposes, detecting change between image scenes, and assessing topography and structure in
forestry and grassland ecosystems (volume, biomass, biodiversity) and built environments will
be examined. Real-world remote sensing and field data from international, US, and local sources are used throughout this course. (Prerequisites: IMGS-431 and (PHYS-112 or 1017-212 or
1017-212T or 1017-213 or PHYS-212) or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-539 
Principles of Solid State Imaging Arrays
This course covers the basics of solid state physics, electrical engineering, linear systems, and
imaging needed to understand modern focal plane array design and use. The course emphasizes knowledge of the working of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) and
infrared arrays. (This course is restricted to students with at least 4th year standing in the
IMGS-BS program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
IMGS-542 
Testing of Focal Plane Arrays
This course is an introduction to the techniques used for the testing of solid state imaging
detectors such as CCD, CMOS, and infrared arrays. This is a hands-on course where the students measure the performance parameters of a particular camera in detail. (This course is
restricted to students with at least 4th year standing in the IMGS-BS program.) Lab 6, Lecture
1, Credits 3 (Spring)
IMGS-599 
Imaging Science Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in any of their years of study. (Enrollment
in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Independent
Study, Credits 1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Interdisciplinary Science
ITDS-151H 
Explorations of Place and Space
The course will explore networks and how their structure relates to the behaviour of the people in those networks. Students will develop an understanding, through experimentation and
investigation, of how the mathematics of network structure impacts the overall consequences
of many seemingly unrelated ideas. Common and familiar phenomena, such as social networks and food webs, can be modeled as networks. The course will introduce the needed
graph theory (the branch of mathematics that studies networks). Students will examine real
networks through the viewpoint of a mathematician, gaining an understanding of many seemingly unrelated concepts. The honors seminar integrates the required YearOne curriculum.
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Science

ITDS-160 
Frontiers of Science I
Students will be introduced to the science knowledge underlying four areas of active scientific
research on the RIT campus and give them skills in understanding, analyzing and explaining
evidence, data, and results in those fields to provide a strong, rounded science background
connected to exciting and up-to-date scientific work. Students develop a portfolio of work
demonstrating their scientific literacy skills. Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Fall)

Mathematics

ITDS-161 
Frontiers of Science II
This course builds upon Frontiers of Science I, advancing the students into an in-depth exploration of research in science on campus. The course surveys the active science research areas
through laboratory visits and complementary literature surveys. Students will subsequently
develop a deeper understanding of a specific area of scientific research through the acquisition
of related laboratory and/or online data. They will synthesize the information gleaned from
their literature searches, laboratory visits and data in order to form and test a specific hypothesis. Students will learn to analyze the data in order to validate their hypothesis, will learn to
communicate their understanding of the active research area, and will develop mixed-media
presentations that interactively engage an audience in the topic. (Prerequisites: ITDS-160 or
equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

MATH-101 
College Algebra
This course provides the background for an introductory level, non-trigonometry based calculus
course. The topics include a review of the fundamentals of algebra: solutions of linear, fractional, and quadratic equations, functions and their graphs, polynomial, exponential, logarithmic
and rational functions, and systems of linear equations. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

MATH-090 Algebra
This course covers operations involving polynomials, algebraic fractions, factoring, exponents and radicals, solutions of linear and quadratic equations, and graphing linear equations.
Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

MATH-104 
Contemporary Mathematics
This course provides an exploration of assorted mathematical concepts by using a hands-on
approach. Topics will be selected from a wide array of fields to show the presence and importance of mathematics in everyday life. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

ITDS-165 
Machining of Scientific Apparatus
This shop course introduces safe machine practices. Students will also gain experience fabricating components for use in scientific apparatus. Lab 3, Credits 1 (Fall, Summer)

MATH-111 Precalculus
This course provides the background for an introductory level, trigonometry-based calculus
course. The topics include functions and their graphs, trigonometric functions, and conic sections. Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ITDS-189 
Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring)

MATH-131 
Discrete Mathematics
This course is an introduction to the topics of discrete mathematics, including number systems, sets and logic, relations, combinatorial methods, graph theory, regular sets, vectors, and
matrices. Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

ITDS-280 
Designing of Scientific Experiments
This course is an introduction to design and analysis of scientific research experiments. The
course will present various types of experimental designs and include discussions of situations in which each is appropriate. In-class sessions will generally follow a group discussion
format. This course is centered on a research experimental design experience. The student will
bring or develop a research question, design an appropriate experiment, gather and analyze
data, and prepare the results. The culminating event is a research “conference” at which the
students will present their findings. (Prerequisites: MATH-181 or MATH-251 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Int)

MATH-161 
Applied Calculus
This course is an introduction to the study of differential and integral calculus, including the
study of functions and graphs, limits, continuity, the derivative, derivative formulas, applications of derivatives, the definite integral, the fundamental theorem of calculus, basic techniques
of integral approximation, exponential and logarithmic functions, basic techniques of integration, an introduction to differential equations, and geometric series. Applications in business,
management sciences, and life sciences will be included with an emphasis on manipulative
skills. (Prerequisite: C- or better in MATH-101, MATH-111 or MATH-131 or a math placement
exam (MPE) score greater than or equal to 55.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

ITDS-359 
STEM Education: Research and Practice
Research and practice introduces students to the research, theories, and applications of disciplinary-based education research (DBER). The course covers cognitive theories of learning
(e.g. transfer and representational models) and their application to the disciplinary context.
Classroom activities will include video examples of science learning environments, which
students will analyze for level of engagement, analysis of a variety of conceptual and epistemological evaluations, and direct data analysis. Independent and/or group projects will allow
for deeper study within the student’s chosen discipline. Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall, Spring)

MATH-171 
Calculus A
This is the first course in a three-course sequence (MATH-171, MATH-172, MATH-173). This
course includes a study of functions, continuity, and differentiability. The study of functions
includes the definition, representations, and the trigonometric functions. Limits of functions
are used to study continuity and differentiability. The study of the derivative includes the
definition, the basic rules, and implicit differentiation. Applications of the derivative include
problems in related rates and curve sketching. (Prerequisite: MATH-111 with a grade of C or
better or a math placement exam (MPE) score greater than or equal to 55) Lecture 5, Credits
3 (Fall, Spring)

ITDS-370 
Discipline-based Education Resarch Methods and Theory
This course is an introduction to major research themes, methodology, theories of learning,
and research ethics relevant to discipline-based education research (DBER) in biology, chemistry, and physics. Research methods related to studying learning and development of expertise
in science will include: the design of quantitative studies (surveys, assessments, and statistical analysis methods) and the design of qualitative studies (interviews, observations, coding).
Relevant theories of learning will include cognitivist, developmental, and social/cultural perspectives. The course will use case studies from current literature on biology, chemistry, and
physics education research to introduce these topics. Students will apply their understanding
to develop and execute a semester-long research project in DBER. (Prerequisite: MATH-182
or PHYS-212 or PHYS-216 or CHMG-142 or CHEM-151 or BIOL-122 or BIOL-102 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ITDS-389 
Intermediate Special Topics
This is an intermediate course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (This course requires permission of the Instructor to enroll.) Lecture/Lab,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITDS-489 
Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

Special Topics

MATH-173 
Calculus C
This is the third course in three-course sequence (MATH-171, MATH-172, MATH-173). This
course includes representations of functions by infinite series, convergence and divergence of
series, curves defined by parametric equations, polar coordinates. (Prerequisites: C- or better
in MATH-172 or equivalent course.) Lecture 5, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MATH-180 
Calculus Bridge
This course covers the topics in MATH-181 that are not covered in MATH-171, thereby preparing students to enter Project-Based Calculus II. This course meets for 15 days during the
Tiger Term. This course does not constitute completion of a mathematics perspective in the
RIT General Education Framework.. Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Int)
MATH-181 
Project-Based Calculus I
This is the first in a two-course sequence intended for students majoring in mathematics, science or engineering. It emphasizes the understanding of concepts, and using them to solve
real-world problems. The course covers two-dimensional analytic geometry, functions, limits, continuity, the derivative, rules of differentiation, applications of the derivative, Riemann
sums, definite integrals, and indefinite integrals. (Prerequisite: Students must have a math
placement exam (MPE) score greater than or equal to 75 or department permission to enroll
in this class.) Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

169

College of Science

MATH-181A 
Calculus I
This is the first in a two-course sequence devoted to the study of single-variable calculus. The
course includes the same topics as COS-MATH-181, but the focus of its workshop component is
different. Whereas workshops attached to 181 emphasize concept development and commonly
provide real-world applications, the workshops of 181A emphasize skill development and provide just-in-time review of precalculus material as needed. The course covers two-dimensional
analytic geometry, functions, limits, continuity, the derivative, rules of differentiation, applications of the derivative, Riemann sums, definite integrals, and indefinite integrals. (Prerequisite:
Students must have a math placement exam (MPE) score greater than or equal to 60 but less
than 75 to enroll in this class or have completed ACSC-71.) Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
MATH-182 
Project-Based Calculus II
This is the second in a two-course sequence intended for students majoring in mathematics, science or engineering. It emphasizes the understanding of concepts, and using them to
solve real-world problems. The course covers techniques of integration including integration
by parts, partial fractions, improper integrals, applications of integration, representing functions by infinite series, convergence and divergence of series, parametric curves, and polar
coordinates. (Prerequisites: C- or better in (MATH-181 or MATH-173 or 1016-282) or (MATH171 and MATH-180) or equivalent course(s).) Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH-182A 
Calculus II
This is the second in a two-course sequence devoted to the study of single-variable calculus.
The course includes the same topics as MATH 182, but the focus of its workshop component
is different. Whereas workshops attached to 181 emphasize concept development and commonly provide real-world applications, the workshops of 182A emphasize skill development
and provide just-in-time review of precalculus material as needed. The course covers techniques
of integration including integration by parts, partial fractions, improper integrals, applications of integration, representing functions by infinite series, convergence and divergence of
series, parametric curves, and polar coordinates. (Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH-181A
or equivalent course.) Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Spring, Summer)
MATH-185 
Mathematics of Graphical Simulation I
This is the first part of a two course sequence that aims at providing the mathematical tools
needed to manipulate graphical objects and to model and simulate the physical properties of
these objects. Topics from linear algebra, primarily in two and three dimensional space, analytic geometry, and calculus will be presented. The emphasis is on linear algebra, particularly
its application to problems in geometry and graphical systems. (Prerequisites: MATH-101 or
MATH-111 or MATH-131 or MATH-171 or MATH-181 or equivalent course or permission
of advisor.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

MATH-211 
Elements of Multivariable Calculus and Differential Equations
This course includes an introduction to differential equations, Laplace transforms, numerical
methods in differential equations, and the calculus of functions of two variables. The emphasis is on the application of these topics to problems in engineering technology. (Prerequisites:
MATH-172 or MATH-182 or MATH 182A or 1016-232 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MATH-219 
Multivariable Calculus
This course is principally a study of the calculus of functions of two or more variables, but also
includes the study of vectors, vector-valued functions and their derivatives. The course covers
limits, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, and includes applications in physics. Credit cannot be granted for both this course and MATH-221. (Prerequisite: MATH-173 or MATH-182
or MATH-182A or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH-220 
Vector Calculus
This course introduces students to the concepts, techniques, and central theorems of vector
calculus. It includes a study of line integrals, conservative vector fields, the flux of vector fields
across curves and surfaces, Green’s Theorem, the Divergence Theorem, and Stokes’ Theorem.
Credit may not be earned for this class if it is earned in COS-MATH-221. (Prerequisites: MATH219 or equivalent course.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
MATH-221H 
Honors Multivariable and Vector Calculus
This course is an honors version of MATH-221. It includes an introduction to vectors, surfaces, and multivariable functions. It covers limits, partial derivatives and differentiability,
multiple integrals, Stokes’ Theorem, Green’s Theorem, the Divergence Theorem, and applications. Unlike MATH-221, students in this course will often be expected to learn elementary
skills and concepts from their text so that in-class discussion can focus primarily on extending
techniques, interpreting results, and exploring mathematical topics in greater depth; homework exercises and projects given in this class will require greater synthesis of concepts and
skills, on average, than those in MATH-221. Students earning credit for this course cannot earn
credit for MATH-219 or MATH-221. (Prerequisite: C- or better MATH-173 or MATH-182 or
MATH-182A or equivalent course.C or better MATH-173 or 182) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Fall)
MATH-231 
Differential Equations
This course is an introduction to the study of ordinary differential equations and their applications. Topics include solutions to first order equations and linear second order equations,
methods of undetermined coefficients, variation of parameters, linear independence and the
Wronskian, vibrating systems, and Laplace transforms. (Prerequisite: MATH-173 or MATH182 or MATH-182A or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

MATH-186 
Mathematics of Graphical Simulation II
This is the second part of a two-course sequence that aims at providing the mathematical tools
needed to manipulate graphical objects and to model and simulate the physical properties of
these objects. Topics from linear algebra, primarily in two and three dimensional space, analytic
geometry, and calculus will be presented. The emphasis is on analytic geometry and calculus,
as applied to geometric and physical simulations. (Prerequisites: MATH-185 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

MATH-233 
Linear Systems and Differential Equations
This is an introductory course in linear algebra and ordinary differential equations in which
a scientific computing package is used to clarify mathematical concepts, visualize problems,
and work with large systems. The course covers matrix algebra, the basic notions and techniques of ordinary differential equations with constant coefficients, and the physical situation
in which they arise. (Prerequisites: MATH-172 or MATH-182 or MATH 182A or 1016-232 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 4, Credits 4 (Spring)

MATH-189 
Special Topics
This is a course suitable for first-year students that covers topics not currently offered in the
curriculum. This course is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites,
contact hours, and examination procedures. Lecture, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

MATH-251 
Probability and Statistics I
This course will introduce sample spaces and events, axioms of probability, counting techniques, conditional probability and independence, distributions of discrete and continuous
random variables, joint distributions (discrete and continuous), the central limit theorem,
descriptive statistics, interval estimation, and applications of probability and statistic to realworld problems. (Prerequisites: MATH-172 or MATH-182 or MATH 182A or 1016-232 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

MATH-190 
Discrete Mathematics for Computing
This course introduces students to ideas and techniques from discrete mathematics that are
widely used in Computer Science. Students will learn about the fundamentals of propositional
and predicate calculus, set theory, relations, recursive structures and counting. This course will
help students develop mathematical sophistication and the ability to handle abstract problems.
(Co-requisites: MATH-182 or MATH-182A or MATH-172 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MATH-199 
Mathematics and Statistics Seminar
This course introduces the programs within the School of Mathematical Sciences, and provides
an introduction to math and statistics software. The course provides practice in technical writing. Seminar 1, Credits 1 (Fall)
MATH-200 
Discrete Mathematics and Introduction to Proofs
This course prepares students for professions that use mathematics in daily practice, and for
mathematics courses beyond the introductory level where it is essential to communicate effectively in the language of mathematics. It covers various methods of mathematical proof, starting
with basic techniques in propositional and predicate calculus and set theory, and then moving
to applications in advanced mathematics. (Prerequisite: MATH-173 or MATH-182 or MATH182A or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Recitation, Credits 3 (Fall)

170	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

MATH-252 
Probability and Statistics II
This course covers basic statistical concepts, sampling theory, hypothesis testing, confidence
intervals, point estimation, and simple linear regression. The statistical software package
MINITAB will be used for data analysis and statistical applications. (Prerequisites: MATH251 or 1016-345 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
MATH-255 
Actuarial Mathematics
This course provides challenging problems in probability whose solutions require a combination of skills that one acquires in a typical mathematical statistics curriculum. Course work
synthesizes basic, essential problem-solving ideas and techniques as they apply to actuarial
mathematics and the first actuarial exam. (Prerequisites: MATH-251 or 1016-345 or equivalent course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)

College of Science

MATH-261 
Topics in the Mathematics of Finance
This course examines concepts in finance from a mathematical viewpoint. It includes topics
such as the Black-Scholes model, financial derivatives, the binomial model, and an introduction to stochastic calculus. Although the course is mathematical in nature, only a background
in calculus (including Taylor series) and basic probability is assumed; other mathematical
concepts and numerical methods are introduced as needed. (Prerequisites: (MATH-219 or
MATH-221 or MATH-221H) and (STAT-145 or STAT-145H or MATH-251) or equivalent
courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
MATH-289 
Special Topics
This is an course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is structured
as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 3
MATH-291 
History of Mathematics
This course is an introduction to the history of mathematics that covers some of the major
developments in the history of mathematics, their historical background, and the people who
made them. It provides the opportunity to study and to write about these topics. The topics will
include Pythagoras, Newton and Leibniz, and Cantor. (Prerequisite: MATH-181 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
MATH-295 
Topics in Mathematical Problem Solving
This course develops strategies for solving problems that are chosen from a wide variety of
areas in mathematics. Emphasis is on attempting problem solutions and presenting efforts to
the class or instructor. (Prerequisite: MATH-173 or MATH-182 or MATH-182A or equivalent
course.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Fall)
MATH-301 
Mathematics of Simulation
This course is an introduction to computer simulation, simulation languages, model building and computer implementation, mathematical analyses of simulation models and their
results using techniques from probability and statistics. (Prerequisites: MATH-252 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MATH-305 
Introduction to Mathematical Computing
This course is in an introduction to the use and application of scientific computing packages to
graphically explore, numerically approximate, and symbolically compute solutions to problems
arising in undergraduate courses in science, engineering and mathematics. Specific applications include numerical differentiation and integration, numerical optimization, initial value
problems, linear systems of equations, and data fitting. (Prerequisites: (MATH-219 or MATH221 or MATH-221H) and CSCI-141 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)
MATH-311 
Linear Optimization
This course presents the general linear programming problem. Topics include a review of
pertinent matrix theory, convex sets and systems of linear inequalities, the simplex method of
solution, artificial bases, duality, parametric programming, and applications. (Prerequisites:
MATH-241 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MATH-312 
Nonlinear Optimization
This course provides a study of the theory of optimization of non-linear functions of several
variables with or without constraints. Applications of this theory in business, management,
engineering and the sciences are considered. Algorithms for practical applications will be analyzed and implemented. The course may require the use of specialized software to analyze
problems. Students taking this course will be expected to complete applied projects and/or
case studies. (Prerequisites: (MATH-219 or MATH-221 or MATH-221H) and MATH-311 or
equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

MATH-351 
Graph Theory
This course covers the theory of graphs and networks for both directed and undirected graphs.
Topics include graph isomorphism, Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs, matching, covers, connectivity, coloring, and planarity. There is an emphasis on applications to real world problems
and on graph algorithms such as those for spanning trees, shortest paths, and network flows.
(Prerequisites: MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1055-265 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall)
MATH-361 Combinatorics
This course introduces the mathematical theory of enumeration of discrete structures. Topics
include enumeration, combinatorial proofs, recursion, inclusion-exclusion, and generating
functions. (Prerequisites: MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1055-265 or equivalent course.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MATH-367 
Codes and Ciphers
This course will introduce, explain and employ the basic techniques of cryptography, both
classical and modern. Topics will include the Vignere cipher, affine ciphers, Hill ciphers, onetime pad encryption, Enigma, cryptosystems such as DES (Data Encryption Standard) and
AES (Advanced Encryption Standard), public key encryption scheme (RSA), and hash functions. The course will include an introduction to number theoretic tools used in cryptography.
(Prerequisites: MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1055-265 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
MATH-371 
Number Theory
This course provides an introduction to the study of the set of integers and their algebraic
properties. Topics include prime factorization and divisibility, linear Diophantine equations,
congruences, arithmetic functions, primitive roots, and quadratic residues. (Prerequisites:
MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1055-265 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MATH-399 
Mathematical Sciences Job Search Seminar
This course helps students prepare to search for co-op or full-time employment. Students will
learn strategies for conducting a successful job search and transitioning into the work world.
The course meets one hour each week for five weeks. Lecture 1, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
MATH-401 
Stochastic Processes
This course explores Poisson processes and Markov chains with an emphasis on applications.
Extensive use is made of conditional probability and conditional expectation. Further topics,
such as renewal processes, Brownian motion, queuing models and reliability are discussed as
time allows. (Prerequisites: MATH-241 and MATH-251 or equivalent courses.) Lab 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
MATH-411 
Numerical Analysis
This course covers numerical techniques for the solution of nonlinear equations, interpolation,
differentiation, integration, and the solution of initial value problems. (Prerequisites: MATH231 and MATH-241 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
MATH-412 
Numerical Linear Algebra
This course covers numerical techniques for the solution of systems of linear equations,
eigenvalue problems, singular values and other decompositions, applications to least
squares, boundary value problems, and additional topics at the discretion of the instructor.
(Prerequisites: (MATH-220 or MATH-221 or MATH-221H or 1055-359 (Honors Multivariable
Calculus)) and (MATH-231 and MATH-341) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Spring)

MATH-321 
Game Theory
This course introduces solution techniques and applications of Game Theory. Topics include
game trees, matrix games, linear inequalities, convex sets, the minimax theorem, and n-person games. (Prerequisites: MATH-241 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

MATH-421 
Mathematical Modeling
This course explores problem solving, formulation of the mathematical model from physical
considerations, solution of the mathematical problem, testing the model and interpretation
of results. Problems are selected from the physical sciences, engineering, and economics.
(Prerequisites: (MATH-220 or MATH-221 or 1016-410 or 1016-328) and MATH-231 and
MATH-241 and MATH-251 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)

MATH-331 
Dynamical Systems
The course revisits the equations of spring-mass system, RLC circuits, and pendulum systems
in order to view and interpret the phase space representations of these dynamical systems. The
course begins with linear systems followed by a study of the stability analysis of nonlinear systems. Matrix techniques are introduced to study higher order systems. The Lorentz equation
will be studied to introduce the concept of chaotic solutions. (Prerequisites: MATH-231 and
MATH-241 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

MATH-431 
Real Variables I
This course is an investigation and extension of the theoretical aspects of elementary calculus. Topics include mathematical induction, real numbers, sequences, functions, limits,
and continuity. The workshop will focus on helping students develop skill in writing proofs.
(Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1055-265) and (MATH-220 or MATH-221 or
MATH-221H or 1016-410 or 1016-328) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall,
Spring)

MATH-341 
Advanced Linear Algebra
This course provides a further study of the fundamental concepts of linear algebra such as linear transformations, similarity, diagonalization, orthogonality, inner products, Gram-Schmidt,
QR and SV Decomposition, quadratic forms, and various numerical techniques. Several applications of these ideas are also presented. (Prerequisites: MATH-241 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring, Summer)

MATH-432 
Real Variables II
This course is a continuation of MATH-431. It concentrates on differentiation, integration
(Riemann and Riemann-Stieltjes integrals), power series, and sequences and series of functions. (Prerequisites: MATH-431 or equivalent course.MATH-431 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

171

College of Science

MATH-441 
Abstract Algebra I
This course covers basic set theory, number theory, groups, subgroups, cyclic and permutation groups, Lagrange and Sylow theorems, quotient groups, and isomorphism theorems.
Group Theory finds applications in other scientific disciplines like physics and chemistry.
(Prerequisites: (MATH-190 or MATH-200 or 1055-265) and MATH-241 or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

PHYS-104 
Stellar Astronomy
This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of stellar astronomy including the
celestial sphere, constellations, nomenclature, physical properties of stars, principles of spectroscopy as applied to astronomy, double stars, variable stars, star clusters, stellar evolution,
gaseous nebulae, stellar motions and distribution, the Milky Way system, external galaxies,
and cosmology. Lecture 2, Credits 2 (Spring)

MATH-442 
Abstract Algebra II
This course covers the basic theory of rings, integral domains, ideals, modules, and abstract
vector spaces. It also covers the key constructions including direct sums, direct products,
and field extensions. These topics serve as the foundation of mathematics behind advanced
topics such as algebraic geometry and various applications like cryptography and coding theory. (Prerequisites: MATH-441 or equivalent course.MATH-441 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)

PHYS-105 
Stellar Astronomy Lab
This laboratory course includes experiments and exercises that relate to the principles and
theories discussed in PHYS-104 Stellar Astronomy. Observational exercises utilizing the RIT
observatory and associated equipment will be emphasized. (Co-requisites: PHYS-104 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Spring)

MATH-461 Topology
This course defines metric spaces and topological spaces. For metric spaces it examines continuity spaces of continuous functions and completeness in Euclidean spaces. For topological
spaces it examines compactness, continuous functions, and separation axioms. (Prerequisites:
MATH-432 or equivalent course.MATH-432 Prereq) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
MATH-489 
Advanced Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is
structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. Lecture/Lab, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH-495 
Math Undergraduate Research
This course is a faculty-directed project that could be considered original in nature. The level
of work is appropriate for students in their final two years of undergraduate study. Research,
Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH-498 
Independent Study in Mathematical Sciences
This course is a faculty-guided investigation into appropriate topics that are not part of the
curriculum. Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH-499 
Mathematics Co-op
This course is a cooperative education experience for undergraduate students majoring in
Applied Mathematics, Computational Mathematics or Statistics. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) Co-op, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
MATH-500 
Senior Capstone in Mathematics
This capstone experience introduces students to mathematical problems and situations not
encountered in previous courses of study. The class will primarily revolve around studentdirected,collaborative efforts to solve a given problem using rigorous mathematical analysis
and (as appropriate) computational methods. Significant work outside the classroom will be
required of students. Students will write a formal report of their solution methods, and produce
a poster for presentation at an end-of-term conference-style event. (Prerequisite: MATH-411
and MATH-421 and (MATH-431 or MATH-441) or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)
MATH-501 
Experiential Learning Requirement in Mathematics
The experiential learning requirement in the Applied Mathematics and Computational
Mathematics programs can be accomplished in various ways. This course exists to record
the completion of experiential learning activities that have been pre-approved by the School
of Mathematical Sciences. Such pre-approval is considered on a case-by-case basis. Lecture,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Physics
PHYS-103 
Explorations in Physics
This is an activity-based course in which topics will encompass a range of physical phenomena.
Scientific concepts are introduced to provide a basis for understanding phenomena such as
sight and optics, motion, rainbows, cloud formation, and global warming. The course is modular in nature, with students working through activity units in order to master basic material,
and then developing a project on a topic of their choosing. Two or three units are chosen from
a canon including, but not limited to: motion, forces, and scientific theories; light, sight, and
rainbows; heat, temperature, and cloud formation; buoyancy, pressure, and flight; and atoms,
crystals, and snowflakes. Each unit introduces basic concepts needed to understand a complicated natural phenomenon. The main emphasis is on the process of scientific investigation,
including how to frame scientific questions and what constitutes acceptable evidence of a scientific idea. Lab, Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

172	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHYS-106 
Solar System Astronomy
This course provides an introduction to basic concepts of solar system astronomy including
celestial sphere, zodiac, astronomical telescopes, sun, moon, eclipses, earth as planet, planets
and their satellites, comets, meteors, and theories of the origin of the solar system. Lecture
2, Credits 2 (Fall)
PHYS-107 
Solar System Astronomy Lab
This laboratory course includes experiments related to the principles and theories discussed in
the corresponding lecture course Solar System Astronomy PHYS-106. Observational exercises
utilizing the RIT observatory and associated equipment will be emphasized. (Co-requisites:
PHYS-106 or equivalent course.) Lab 2, Credits 1 (Fall)
PHYS-111 
College Physics I
This is an introductory course in algebra-based physics focusing on mechanicsand waves.
Topics include kinematics, planar motion, Newton’s laws,gravitation; rotational kinematics
and dynamics; work and energy; momentumand impulse; conservation laws; simple harmonic
motion; waves; datapresentation/analysis and error propagation. The course is taught using
bothtraditional lectures and a workshop format that integrates material traditionallyfound in
separate lecture, recitation, and laboratory settings. Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
PHYS-112 
College Physics II
This course is an introduction to algebra-based physics focusing on thermodynamics, electricity and magnetism, optics, and elementary topics in modern physics. Topics include heat
and temperature, laws of thermodynamics, fluids, electric and magnetic forces and fields, DC
electrical circuits, electromagnetic induction, opyics, the concept of the photon, and the Bohr
model of the atom. The course is taught using both traditional lectures and a workshop format that integrates material traditionally found in separate lecture, recitation, and laboratory
settings. (Prerequisites: PHYS-111 or 1017-211 or equivalent course.PHYS-111 or 1017-211)
Lab 4, Lecture 2, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
PHYS-189 
Introductory Special Topics
This is an introductory course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering
the course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 4
PHYS-205 
Principles of Optics
This course is an introduction to physical and geometrical optics. Topics will include: wave and
photon description of light; propagation of electromagnetic waves in vacuum and transparent
media; mirrors, lenses, and simple optical instruments; basics of optical fibers; polarization of
light and polarizing optical elements; interference; Michelson interferometer; Fraunhofer and
Fresnel diffraction; diffraction gratings. (Prerequisites: PHYS-112 or 1017-213 and (1017-212
or 1017-212T) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 4, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-207 
University Physics I: AP-C Waves
This course is without exception only for students who have earned credit for PHYS-206. This
course is without exception only for students who have earned credit for the AP-C Mechanics
exam. This is a course in calculus-based physics for science and engineering majors. Topics
include mechanical oscillations and waves, and data presentation/analysis. The course is
taught in a workshop format that integrates the material traditionally found in separate lecture and laboratory courses. This course together with PHYS-206 is equivalent to PHYS-211.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-206 and (MATH-181 or MATH-181A or MATH-172) or equivalent courses. Co-requisite: MATH-182 or MATH-182A or MATH-172 or equivalent course.) Lab 2.5,
Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)

College of Science

PHYS-209 
University Physics II: AP-C Optics
This course is without exception only for students who have earned credit for PHYS-208. This
course is without exception only for students who have earned credit for the AP-C Electricity
& Magnetism exam. Topics include geometrical and physical optics. The course is taught in
a lecture/workshop format that integrates the material traditionally found in separate lecture and laboratory courses. This course together with PHYS-208 is equivalent to PHYS-212.
(Prerequisites: (PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or PHYS-207) and PHYS-208 and (MATH-181 or
MATH-181A) or equivalent courses.Co-requisite: MATH-182 or MATH-182A or MATH-172
or equivalent course.) Lab 2.5, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
PHYS-211A 
University Physics IA
This is a course in calculus-based physics for science and engineering majors whose performance on the Math Placement Exam resulted in their placement in MATH-181A. Topics
include kinematics, planar motion, Newton’s Laws, gravitation, work and energy, momentum and impulse, conservation laws, systems of particles, rotational motion, static equilibrium,
mechanical oscillations and waves, and data presentation/analysis. The course is taught in a
workshop format that integrates the material traditionally found in separate lecture and laboratory courses. (Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH-181 or MATH-181A or MATH-172
or equivalent course.Co-requisites: MATH-182 or MATH-182A or MATH-172 or equivalent
course.) Lecture/Lab 7.5, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
PHYS-211B 
University Physics I Bridge Workshop
This a 3-week intensive workshop specifically aimed at strengthening the competencies of students who previously received a grade of D in University Physics I or IA in the immediately
preceding semester. Topics include kinematics, planar motion, Newton’s Laws, gravitation,
work and energy, momentum and impulse, conservation laws, systems of particles, rotational
motion, static equilibrium, mechanical oscillations and waves, and data presentation/analysis. The intent is not to provide an accelerated re-delivery of University Physics I or IA. This
course focuses on typical difficulties encountered by students in an interactive setting and provides the opportunity for the students to demonstrate improved competencies in the subject
matter. There will also be some laboratory experiences that must be successfully completed.
A significant effort outside the classroom is also expected. (Prerequisites: Earned grade of "D"
in PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A in the previous term.) Lab 12, Credits 0 (Int)
PHYS-213 
Modern Physics I
This course provides an introductory survey of elementary quantum physics, as well as basic
relativistic dynamics. Topics include the photon, wave-particle duality, deBroglie waves, the
Bohr model of the atom, the Schrodinger equation and wave mechanics, quantum description
of the hydrogen atom, electron spin, and multi-electron atoms. (Prerequisites: PHYS-209 or
PHYS-212 or PHYS-217 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS-214 
Modern Physics II
This course is a continuation of a survey of modern physics beyond the topics introduced in
Modern Physics I. Central topics include the physics of multi-electron atoms, molecular structure, fundamentals of statistical physics applied to systems of particles, elementary solid-state
physics, applications to semiconductor materials and simple devices, and basic elements of
nuclear physics. (Prerequisites: PHYS-213 or equivalent course. Students in the PHYS-BS program must also complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-216 
University Physics I: Physics Majors
This is a course in calculus-based physics for physics majors. Topics include kinematics, planar
motion, Newton’s Laws, gravitation, work and energy, momentum and impulse, conservation laws, systems of particles, rotational motion, static equilibrium, mechanical oscillations
and waves, and data presentation/analysis. Calculus and basic numerical techniques will be
applied throughout the course to analyze non-idealized complex systems. The course is taught
in a workshop format that integrates the material traditionally found in separate lecture and
laboratory courses. The course will also include enrichment activities connecting current developments in the field of physics. (Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH-181 or equivalent course.
Co-requisites: MATH-182 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 7.5, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)
PHYS-217 
University Physics II: Physics Majors
This course is a continuation of PHYS-216, University Physics I: Physics Majors. Topics include
fluids, thermodynamics, electrostatics, Gauss’ law, electric field and potential, capacitance,
resistance, circuits, magnetic field, Ampere’s law, inductance, and geometrical and physical
optics. Calculus and basic numerical techniques will be applied throughout the course to analyze
non-idealized complex systems. The course is taught in a lecture/workshop format that integrates the material traditionally found in separate lecture and laboratory courses. The course
will also include enrichment activities connecting current developments in the field of physics. (Prerequisites: Grades of C- or better in (MATH-182 or MATH-182A) and (PHYS-216 or
PHYS-206) or equivalent courses.) Lecture/Lab 7.5, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring)

	

PHYS-220 
University Astronomy
This course is an introduction to the basic concepts of astronomy and astrophysics for scientists and engineers. Topics include the celestial sphere, celestial mechanics, methods of
data acquisition, planetary systems, stars and stellar systems, cosmology, and life in the universe. (Prerequisites: PHYS-211 or PHYS-211A or PHYS-216 or (MECE-102 and MECE-103
and MECE-205) or (PHYS-206 and PHYS-207) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring)
PHYS-222 
Electronic Measurements
This course covers the fundamentals of AC and DC circuit theory, electrical analysis of simple linear networks, operations of and circuits containing diodes and transistors, linear and
non-linear operation of op-amps and their applications, and analysis of basic digital circuits.
Laboratory classes reinforce lecture material and teach practical skills in use of basic test and
measurement equipment. (Prerequisites: PHYS-212 or PHYS-217 or PHYS-208 and 209 or
equivalent course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-225 
Introduction to Computational Physics and Programming
This course introduces methods for using computers to model the behavior of physical systems. Students will learn how computers represent numbers, limits of computation, how to
write computer programs, and to use good programming practices. Students will also apply
numerical methods of differentiation and integration, and numerical solutions to differential
equations in physical situations. (Prerequisites: PHYS-212 or PHYS-217 or PHYS-208 and 209
or equivalent course.) Lab 4, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-275 
Sophomore Physics Seminar
This seminar will assist students in their preparation for the Physics Comprehensive Oral
Exam (CORE) required at the end of the course by presenting a unified as opposed to topical
approach to physics. Physics majors must pass this course before going on to 300-level Physics
courses. (Prerequisites: PHYS-212 or PHYS-217 or PHYS-209 or equivalent course.) Lecture
2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)
PHYS-283 
Vibrations and Waves
This course is an introduction to the physics of vibrations and waves, beginning with the simple
harmonic oscillator, the foundation to understanding oscillatory and vibratory systems. The
course will include driven and damped single oscillators, coupled discrete oscillators, and continuous vibrating systems. Connections will be made with many areas of physics that involve
oscillation, including mechanics, electromagnetism, and quantum mechanics. (Prerequisites:
PHYS-212 or PHYS-217 or PHYS-209 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-289 
Intermediate Special Topics
This is an intermediate course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course
is structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering
the course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 4
PHYS-295 
Physics Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature. The
level of study is appropriate for students in their first three years of study. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Research, Credits 1 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS-298 
Physics Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their first three years of study.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS-315 
Experiments in Modern Physics
In this course, students perform experiments representative of the foundation of modern quantum physics. These include investigations of wave particle duality, and the earliest of quantum
mechanical models as well as measurements of fundamental constants. Experiments typically
include electron diffraction, the photoelectric effect, optical diffraction and interference, atomic
spectroscopy, charge-to-mass ratio of an electron, and blackbody radiation. This class teaches
basic instrumentation techniques as well as data reduction and analysis. Students are expected to keep a laboratory notebook and present results in a journal-style paper. (Prerequisites:
PHYS-213 or equivalent course. Students in the PHYS-BS program must also complete PHYS275 prior to taking this course.) Lab 4, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Fall)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

173

College of Science

PHYS-316 
Advanced Laboratory in Physics
In this course, students perform advanced experiments representative of the foundation of
modern quantum physics. Experiments typically explore properties of materials, semiconductors, atomic physics, and nuclear decay. This class continues the instruction in instrumentation
techniques as well as data reduction and analysis that began in Experiments in Modern Physics,
PHYS-315. Students are expected to keep a laboratory notebook and present results in a journal-style paper. (Prerequisites: PHYS-214 and PHYS-315 or equivalent courses. Students in
the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.)
Lab 4, Lecture 1, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-320 
Mathematical Methods in Physics
This course serves as an introduction to the mathematical tools needed to solve intermediate and upper-level physics problems. Topics include matrix algebra, vector calculus, Fourier
analysis, partial differential equations in rectangular coordinates, and an introduction to series
solutions of ordinary differential equations. (Prerequisites: (MATH-219 or MATH-221) and
MATH-231 and (PHYS-209 or PHYS-212 or PHYS-217) or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-321 
Advanced Mathematical Methods in Physics
This course is a continuation of PHYS-320, serving to introduce additional mathematical
tools needed to solve intermediate and upper-level physics problems. Topics include special
functions, series solutions to ordinary differential equations, solutions to partial differential
equations in curvilinear coordinate systems, matrix techniques, and the calculus of variations.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-330 
Classical Mechanics
This course is a systematic presentation of Newtonian kinematics and dynamics including equations of motion in one- and three-dimensions, conservation laws, non-inertial reference frames,
central forces, Lagrangian mechanics, and rigid body motion. This course will use advanced
mathematical techniques including differential equations, vector calculus, and matrix and tensor formulations. (Prerequisites: (MATH-219 or MATH-221) and MATH-231 and (PHYS-209
or PHYS-212 or PHYS-217). Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete
PHYS-275 prior to taking this course. Co-requisites: PHYS-320 or equivalent course.) Lecture
4, Credits 4 (Fall)
PHYS-360 
Introduction to Chaotic Dynamics
This course introduces basic tools for visualizing the behavior of nonlinear systems. In particular, the students are required to use the computer as an exploratory tool for generating
and observing transitions between periodic behavior and chaotic behavior. Most of the course
focuses on the driven, damped pendulum as a model dynamical system, but the ideas are readily extended to other systems as well. (Prerequisites: PHYS-283 and (PHYS-330 or 1017-402)
or equivalent courses. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-370 
Stellar Astrophysics
This course presents concepts of stars and stellar systems at an intermediate level. Topics
include the observed characteristics of stars, stellar atmospheres, stellar structure and evolution, interaction of stars with the interstellar medium, and the populations of stars within the
Milky Way Galaxy. (Prerequisites: PHYS-213 and PHYS-220 or equivalent courses. Students
in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3
PHYS-371 
Galactic Astrophysics
This course describes the structure and dynamics of the Milky Way galaxy. It provides an
overview of the major constituents of the Milky Way, their interactions, and the methods by
which astronomers study them. (Prerequisites: PHYS-213 and PHYS-220 or equivalent courses.
Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-372 
Extragalactic Astrophysics and Cosmology
This course provides a survey of the structure of the universe on the largest scales, including
galaxies and clusters of galaxies. The course also provides an overview of the history of the
universe from the Big Bang to the current day, and describes the observational evidence for
our current values of the cosmological parameters. (Prerequisites: PHYS-213 and PHYS-220
or equivalent courses. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-377 
Advanced Computational Physics
This course introduces students to advanced methods for using computers to model the behavior of physical systems. Topics will include numerical solutions to differential equations such
as heat transfer, planetary motion, and shock waves, the Monte Carlo approach to problems
with large domains, tradeoffs between efficiency and precision, minimization and maximization of functions, and the statistical modeling of data. (Prerequisites: PHYS-225 and PHYS-320
or equivalent courses. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS275 prior to taking this course.) Lab 3, Lecture 2, Credits 3 (Spring)

174	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

PHYS-408 
Laser Physics
This course covers the semi-classical theory of the operation of a laser, characteristics and
practical aspects of various laser systems, and some applications of lasers in scientific research.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-365 or equivalent course. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also
required to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-414 
Quantum Mechanics
This course is a study of the concepts and mathematical structure of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Topics for the course include wave functions and the Schrodinger equation,
solutions to the one-dimensional and three-dimensional time-independent Schrodinger
equation, stationary states and their superposition to produce time-dependent states, quantum-mechanical operators, commutators, and uncertainty principles, solutions to general
central potential problems and the hydrogen atom, and the quantum theory of angular momentum. (Prerequisites: PHYS-213, PHYS-320 and (PHYS-330 or 1017-402) or equivalent courses.
Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS-275 before taking this
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-415 
Advanced Quantum Mechanics
This course is a continued study of the concepts and mathematical structure of quantum
mechanics presented in Quantum Mechanics (PHYS-414), with an emphasis on applications
to real physical systems. Topics covered include the quantum theory of spin, effect of magnetic
fields on spin-1/2 particles, many-particle systems, variational principle, time-independent and
time-dependent perturbation theory, absorption and emission of radiation by atoms, quantum
theory of scattering, and interpretations and paradoxes of quantum mechanics. (Prerequisites:
PHYS-414 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-424 
Nuclear Physics
This course is a study of the properties and structure of the atomic nucleus as determined by
experiments and theory. Topics for the course include a description and quantum-mechanical
treatment of radioactive decay, nuclear reactions, basic aspects of nuclear radiation detection,
and selected applications of nuclear physics. (Prerequisites: PHYS-214 and PHYS-320 and
PHYS-330 or equivalent courses. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-432 
Solid State Physics
This course is an introduction to the physics of the solid state including crystal structure, x-ray
diffraction by crystals, crystal binding, elastic waves and lattice vibrations, thermal properties,
the free electron model of solids, and band theory and its applications. (Prerequisites: PHYS214 and PHYS-320 or equivalent courses. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required
to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
PHYS-440 
Thermal and Statistical Physics
This course is an introduction to the principles of classical thermodynamics and its statistical
basis, including: equations of state, the first and second laws of thermodynamics, microscopic
basis of entropy, temperature and thermal equilibrium, thermodynamic potentials, applications of thermodynamics, kinetic theory of gases, and Boltzmann and quantum statistics.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-213 and MATH-231 or equivalent courses. Students in the PHYS-BS program are also required to complete PHYS-275 prior to taking this course.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Fall)
PHYS-441 
Advanced Thermal and Statistical Physics
This course is a continued study of the concepts and mathematical structure of statistical physics presented in Thermal and Statistical Physics (PHYS-440). Topics covered include ensembles
in statistical physics, weakly interacting gases, the Ising model of a ferromagnet, monatomic
liquids, kinetic theory of transport processes, path integral and Boltzmann equation formulations of transport theory. (Prerequisites: PHYS-320 and PHYS-440 or equivalent courses.)
Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-450 
Capstone Preparation
This course is a preparation for the two-semester physics capstone project to be carried out in
the following year. It includes selection of a project and faculty mentor, preparation of a feasibility study, preparation of a paper, and a public oral presentation. (Enrollment in this course
requires permission from the department offering the course.) Lecture 1, Credits 1 (Spring)
PHYS-451 
Capstone Project I
In collaboration with faculty mentor(s), students will carry out the first phase of an experimental, theoretical, or computational physics research project, will prepare an interim paper,
and will present a short talk on their progress to physics faculty and students. The projects are
those planned during the capstone preparatory course taken during the prior Spring semester.
(Prerequisites: PHYS-450 or equivalent course.) Project 12, Credits 3 (Fall)

College of Science

PHYS-452 
Capstone Project II
In collaboration with faculty mentor(s), students will carry out the final phase of an experimental, theoretical, or computational physics research project, will prepare a written paper
and present an oral report on their progress to physics faculty and students. The projects are
those planned during the capstone preparatory course taken during the prior Spring semester and commenced during the prior Fall semester. (Prerequisites: PHYS-451 or equivalent
course.) Project 12, Credits 3 (Spring)
PHYS-489 
Advanced Special Topics
This is an advanced course on a topic that is not part of the formal curriculum. This course is
structured as an ordinary course and has specific prerequisites, contact hours, and examination procedures. (Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering
the course.) Lecture, Credits 1 - 4

STAT-251 
Probability and Statistics for Engineers I
Statistics in engineering; enumerative and analytic studies; descriptive statistics and statistical control; sample spaces and events; axioms of probability; counting techniques; conditional
probability and independence; distributions of discrete and continuous random variables; joint
distributions; central limit theorem. (Prerequisite: MATH-173 or MATH-182 or MATH-182A
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)
STAT-252 
Probability and Statistics for Engineers II
Point estimation; hypothesis testing and confidence intervals; one- and two-sample inference; introduction to analysis of variance, experimental design, and non-parametric methods.
(Prerequisite: CQAS-251 or STAT-251 or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

PHYS-493 
Astrophysics Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving observational or theoretical work in astrophysics that could be considered of an original nature. (Enrollment in
this course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Research, Credits
1 - 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

STAT-295 
Statistical Analysis for Bioinformatics
This course is an introduction to the probabilistic models and statistical techniques used in
computational molecular biology. Probabilistic and/or statistical techniques will be presented
for the understanding of pairwise and multiple sequence alignment methods, gene and protein classification methods, and phylogenetic tree construction. (Prerequisites: MATH-173
or MATH-182 and MATH-190 or MATH-200 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3
(Spring)

PHYS-495 
Advanced Physics Research
This course is a faculty-directed student project or research involving laboratory work, computer modeling, or theoretical calculations that could be considered of an original nature. The
level of study is appropriate for students in their final two years of study. (Enrollment in this
course requires permission from the department offering the course.) Research, Credits 1 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

STAT-305 
Regression Analysis
This course covers regression techniques with applications to the type of problems encountered
in real-world situations. It includes use of the statistical software SAS. Topics include a review
of simple linear regression, residual analysis, multiple regression, matrix approach to regression, model selection procedures, and various other models as time permits. (Prerequisites:
MATH-241 and MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

PHYS-498 
Advanced Physics Independent Study
This course is a faculty-directed tutorial of appropriate topics that are not part of the formal
curriculum. The level of study is appropriate for student in their final two years of study.
(Enrollment in this course requires permission from the department offering the course.)
Independent Study, Credits 1 - 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

STAT-315 
Statistical Quality Control
This course presents the probability models associated with control charts, control charts for
continuous and discrete data, interpretation of control charts, and some standard sampling
plans as applied to quality control. A statistical software package will be used for data analysis.
(Prerequisites: STAT-205 or MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)

PHYS-499 
Physics Co-op
This course is a cooperative education experience for undergraduate physics students. Co-op,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

STAT-325 
Design of Experiments
This course is a study of the design and analysis of experiments. It includes extensive use of
statistical software. Topics include single-factor analysis of variance, multiple comparisons
and model validation, multifactor factorial designs, fixed, random and mixed models, expected
mean square calculations, confounding, randomized block designs, and other designs and topics as time permits. (Prerequisites: STAT-205 or MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture
3, Credits 3 (Fall)

Statistics
STAT-145 
Introduction to Statistics I
This course will study the statistical methods of presenting and analyzing data. Topics covered
include descriptive statistics and displays, random sampling, the normal distribution, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing. The statistical software MINITAB is used to reinforce
these principles and to introduce the use of technology in statistical analysis. This is a general
introductory statistics course and is intended for a broad range of programs. Note: This course
may not be taken for credit if credit is to be earned in STAT-205. (Prerequisite: MATH-101 or
MATH-171 or MATH-181 or MATH-181A or a math placement exam (MPE) score greater
than or equal to 55.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
STAT-145H 
Honors Introduction to Statistics I
This course provides an enriched learning environment for RIT Honors Students with a projectbased, lab-oriented approach to learning statistics. Students will learn to formulate research
problems in statistical terms, design a statistical model to study these problem, collect data,
summarize data, draw inferences in the context of the applications, and present their analyses. Students learn the use of the statistical software package Minitab to aid in the analysis of
data. Students will be expected to participate in class discussions.This course may not be taken
for credit if credit is to be earned in COS-STAT-205. (Prerequisites: MATH-101 or equivalent
course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
STAT-146 
Introduction to Statistics II
This course is an elementary introduction to the topics of regression and analysis of variance.
The statistical software package Minitab will be used to reinforce these techniques. The focus
of this course is on business applications. This is a general introductory statistics course and
is intended for a broad range of programs. (Prerequisites: STAT-145 or equivalent course.)
Lecture 6, Credits 4 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
STAT-205 
Applied Statistics
This course covers basic statistical concepts and techniques including descriptive statistics,
probability, inference, and quality control. The statistical package Minitab will be used to
reinforce these techniques. The focus of this course is on statistical applications and quality improvement in engineering. This course is intended for engineering programs and has a
calculus prerequisite. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit is to be earned in
STAT-145 or STAT-155 or MATH 252.. (Prerequisite: MATH-173 or MATH-182 or MATH182A or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

	

STAT-335 
Introduction to Time Series
This course is a study of the modeling and forecasting of time series. Topics include ARMA
and ARIMA models, autocorrelation function, partial autocorrelation function, detrending,
residual analysis, graphical methods, and diagnostics. A statistical software package is used
for data analysis. (Prerequisites: STAT-205 or MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Spring)
STAT-345 
Nonparametric Statistics
This course is an in-depth study of inferential procedures that are valid under a wide range of
shapes for the population distribution. Topics include tests based on the binomial distribution, contingency tables, statistical inferences based on ranks, runs tests and randomization
methods. A statistical software package is used for data analysis. (Prerequisites: STAT-205 or
MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
STAT-405 
Mathematical Statistics I
This course provides a brief review of basic probability concepts and distribution theory. It
covers mathematical properties of distributions needed for statistical inference. (Prerequisites:
STAT-205 or MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
STAT-406 
Mathematical Statistics II
This course is a continuation of STAT-405 covering classical and Bayesian methods in estimation theory, chi-square test, Neyman-Pearson lemma, mathematical justification of standard
test procedures, sufficient statistics, and further topics in statistical inference. (Prerequisites:
STAT-405 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
STAT-415 
Statistical Sampling
This course provides a basis for understanding the selection of the appropriate tools and techniques for analyzing survey data. Topics include design of simple surveys, methods of data
collection, a study of standard sampling methods. A statistical software package is used for data
analysis. (Prerequisites: STAT-205 or MATH-252 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits
3 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

175

College of Science

STAT-425 
Multivariate Analysis
This course is a study of the multivariate normal distribution, statistical inference on multivariate data, multivariate analysis of covariance, canonical correlation, principal component
analysis, and cluster analysis. A statistical software package such as Excel or SAS is used for
data analysis. (Prerequisites: STAT-305 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
STAT-435 
Statistical Linear Models
This course is an introduction to the theory of linear models. Topics covered are least squares
estimators and their properties, matrix formulation of linear regression theory, random vectors and random matrices, the normal distribution model and the Gauss-Markov theorem,
variability and sums of squares, distribution theory, the general linear hypothesis test, confidence intervals, confidence regions, correlations among regressor variables, ANOVA models,
geometric aspects of linear regression, and less than full rank models. (Prerequisites: STAT305 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
STAT-500 
Senior Capstone in Statistics
The course introduces the student to statistical situations not encountered previously in courses
of study. It integrates and synthesizes concepts in statistical theory with applications. Topics
include open-ended analysis of data, review of statistical literature on current techniques and
practice of statistics, development of statistical communication skills, and the use of statistical
software tools in data analysis. Students may work individually or in a group. Each student is
required to learn and use a statistical technique beyond what is covered in the previous courses.
Student teams are expected to introduce the method in a presentation and to prepare a comprehensive, professional report detailing the statistical method and its application to a data set.
(Prerequisites: STAT-305 and STAT-325 or equivalent courses.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Spring)
STAT-511 
Statistical Software
This course is an introduction to two statistical-software packages, SAS and R, which are often
used in professional practice. Some comparisons with other statistical-software packages will
also be made. Topics include: data structures; reading and writing data; data manipulation,
subsetting, reshaping, sorting, and merging; conditional execution and looping; built-in functions; creation of new functions or macros; graphics; matrices and arrays; simulations; select
statistical applications. (Prerequisites: STAT-205 or MATH-252 or CQAS-252 or STAT-252
or equivalent course.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

176	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

Academic Affairs

Academic Affairs
Index
ITDL	 University Studies Program. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 177
UWRT	 University Writing Program. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 177

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

University Studies Program
ITDL-101 
Career Exploration Seminar
This seminar is designed to introduce students to the process by which they can make an
informed decision in selecting career options and identifying an educational program which
will lead to their career goals. With the assistance of facilitators familiar with assessment instruments, careers and the RIT programs, students begin by assessing their interests, values, skills
and personal traits. Students will be introduced to online and print resources used for researching occupational information and may be asked to interview faculty and administrators as well
as professionals working in fields in which they are interested. Students will complete a variety of activities including class discussions, journal entries, papers and presentations, allowing
them the opportunity to reflect on information gathered throughout the course. Students in the
University Studies and Liberal Arts Exploration programs are required to complete this course
successfully in the first term of their program. Seminar, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)

UWRT-150 
FYW: Writing Seminar
First Year Writing is a three-credit seminar limited to 21 students per section. The course is
designed to develop first-year students’ proficiency in analytical writing, rhetorical reading,
and critical thinking. Students will read, understand, and interpret a variety of texts representing different cultural perspectives and/or academic disciplines. Academic, non-fiction texts,
chosen around a particular theme, are designed to challenge students intellectually and to
stimulate their writing for a variety of contexts and purposes. Through inquiry-based assignment sequences, students will develop academic research and literacy practices that will be
further strengthened throughout their academic careers. Particular attention will be given to
the writing process, including an emphasis on teacher-student conferencing, self-assessment,
class discussion, peer review, formal and informal writing, research, and revision; small class
size promotes frequent student-instructor and student-student interaction. The course also
emphasizes the principles of intellectual property and academic honesty for both current academic and future professional writing. (Prerequisite: Student must have an SAT Verbal Score
greater than or equal to 560 or an ACT English Score of 23 or more or a Writing Placement
Exam score of 2 or higher.) Lecture, Credits 3 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
UWRT-325 
Writing Genre, Theory and Practice
This course offers students the opportunity to develop further their own writing abilities
and to learn how help others improve their writing through the study of genre. Students will
explore writing found in disciplines across the curriculum, analyze writing-related artifacts,
assess peer’s writing, and revise their own writing. The reading, writing, and communication skills developed in this course are utilized in other classes, but also other academic and
workplace contexts (e.g., writing center consultations, instructional design, training development, applied critical thinking, and undergraduate research.) (Prerequisites: Completion of
First Year Writing (FYW) requirement is required prior to enrolling in this class.) Lecture 3,
Credits 3 (Fall, Spring)

ITDL-151H 
Explorations of Place and Space
This honors seminar is a foundational course that examines how our social worlds are linked
to our natural and built worlds. The corresponding emphasis on inquiry, analysis, and interpretation facilitates student-engaged learning. In exploring pertinent place and space related
issues/topics through an experiential, active, and site-specific curricular focused learning, various aspects of the human condition are discovered. The theme or topic of this honors seminar,
as chosen by the instructor, is announced in the subtitle as well as course notes and is developed
in the syllabus. The honors seminar integrates the required YearOne curriculum. Class 3, Credit
3 (F) (This class is restricted to students in the Honors program.) Lecture 3, Credits 3 (Fall)
ITDL-450 
Honors Capstone Seminar: Global Engagements
This capstone seminar constitutes the final requirement for students in the honors program,
providing a culminating senior project experience. Students will enroll in this course in their
final year of study. The seminar will further develop and sharpen the student’s understanding of how their work is affected by a global context. The course uses a problem-solving focus,
culminating in a written senior thesis and project presentation. Counts as honors program
requirement (This class is restricted to degree seeking students with at least 4th year level.)
Lecture 2, Credits 1 (Fall, Spring)

University Writing Program
UWRT-100 
Critical Reading and Writing
Basic writing is a one semester, three-credit course limited to 15 students per section. Basic
Writing is designed to help students placed into the course develop the literacy practices they
will need to be successful in their First-Year Writing course. Students will read, understand,
interpret, and synthesize a variety of texts representing different cultural perspectives and/
or academic disciplines. Assignments are designed to challenge students intellectually and to
stimulate their writing. Through inquiry-based assignment sequences, students will develop
academic research and literacy practices that will be further strengthened in their First-Year
Writing course. Particular attention will be given to critical reading, information management, synthesis of source materials, academic writing conventions, and revision. Small class
size promotes frequent student-instructor and student-student interaction. The course also
emphasizes the principles of intellectual property and academic honesty academic writing.
The credits earned in basic writing do not comprise part of the student’s general education
framework, nor may this course be substituted for any writing-intensive or general education
course. (LAQE or WPE score equal to 1 is required to enroll in this class.) Lecture, Credits 3
(Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

177

Academic Support

Academic Support
Index
ACSC	 Academic Support Center.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
ELCI	 English Language Center. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
ELCA	 English Language Center. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WDAN	Dance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WFIT	Fitness.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WHLS	 Health and Safety. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
WHWS	 Health and Wellness Seminars.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WINT	 Interactive Adventures.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WREC	 Lifetime Recreation Activities. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WMAR	 Martial Arts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WMIL	 Military Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

178
178
179
180
181
183
183
184
187
190
190

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Academic Support Center
ACSC-010 YearOne
The Year One class serves as an interdisciplinary catalyst for first-year students to access
campus resources, services and opportunities that promote self-knowledge, personal success,
leadership development, social responsibility and life academic skills awareness and application. Year One is also designed to challenge and encourage first-year students to get to know
one another, build relationships and help them become an integral part of the campus community. Lecture 1, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
ACSC-020 
First Year Independent Study: Discovery and Pathways
This course is designed for students who want to replace their original grade in Discovery,
Pathways, FYE I or FYE II in an independent study format. Independent Study, Credits 1
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACSC-021 
First Year Independent Study: YearOne
This course is designed for students who want to replace their original grade in YearOne in an
independent study format. Independent Study, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACSC-061 
Applied Study Strategies
This lecture/lab course is designed for students interested in further developing and practicing their abilities in the areas of study skills and time management. Students enrolled in this
course will gain a greater understanding of the learning process through guided practice and
will be able to identify and use strategies that meet their preferred learning style. Students will
practice and apply these strategies to their current credit courses to develop advanced proficiency as active learners. Additionally, students will receive support through individualized
coaching sessions. Lecture/Lab 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
ACSC-062 
Insights On Success
This course provides students an opportunity to gain foundational insight into their own motivation, attitude and regulatory skills related to academic success and to increase their awareness
of strategies to address academic challenges. Students will also learn basic study strategies, how
they are used, and why they are valuable. Lecture 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
ACSC-063 
Study Strategies Lab
This hands-on course is designed for students interested in maintaining their study strategies
and organizational skills with regular support and feedback from an instructor. (Prerequisites:
CRPG-61 or ACSC-62 or ACSC-61 or SLSA-60 or equivalent course.) Lecture/Lab 1, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring)

ACSC-072 
Critical Math Skills
A course offered to RIT students who wish to strengthen their math skills before registering
for or while taking an RIT credit math course; class consists of a self-review or remediation of
prerequisite math concepts in which a student may find themselves struggling. A customized
list of review topics, called a Study Plan will be created based on an initial math assessment that
focuses on basic Algebra, Trigonometry, Precalculus and introductory Calculus. An instructor
is present to provide adequate support to enhance students’ math study skills as well as deepen
their understanding of math concepts. This course requires meeting with a Student Support
Specialist in the Academic Support Center prior to enrollment. *Note: Please contact the ASC
for additional details* Lecture 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACSC-074 
Critical Skills for Statistics
A course offered to students who need a review or remediation of specific statistics concepts;
students who are struggling in RIT introductory statistics courses despite using RIT resources;
students who have withdrawn from their current or past statistics course due to inadequate
preparation, weak math background or lack of appropriate study skills; students who have
received F, D or C in any of their previous introductory statistics courses; students who haven’t
taken statistics for a while and want to strengthen their statistics background before registering
for RIT credit courses or before taking any required statistics exams for their graduate programs. This course may introduce variety of topics such as descriptive statistics, numerical
measures, graphical representations of data, normal probability distribution, t-distribution,
confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, basic statistical inferences, simple linear regression,
multiple regression, regression analysis, and basic probability. The specific topics will be based
on current statistics background and impending needs of students enrolled in the course. A
customized list of review topics, called a Study Plan will be created based on the results of an
initial assessment test and/or series of quizzes taken by the students. Students will review topics that are identified in their personalized Study Plan to improve their statistics background,
as needed. Lecture 30, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

English Language Center
ELCI-001 
Basic Writing and Lang Analysis
In this course, students apply basic principles of grammar and vocabulary to construct meaningfully interconnected sentences in controlled contexts. Students will acquire the basic skills
necessary to prewrite, edit and produce cohesive, unified ideas in clear sentences. Students’
expanding vocabulary base at this level will facilitate their study of the writing process, including prewriting, writing, revising and editing techniques. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
ELCI-003 
Basic Reading and Vocabulary
In this course, students will acquire the reading and vocabulary skills necessary to comprehend a beginning level text. A focus on word study and specific reading strategies will be
taught. Through interaction with other students and the text, students will receive opportunities to communicate orally and in writing regarding their readings in class. Homework and
assessments will reinforce second language literacy skills. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
ELCI-005 
Basic Speaking and Listening
The aim of this course is to provide students with the language skills necessary to communicate
effectively on concrete, familiar topics. Listening comprehension will focus on understanding
explicitly stated information and speaking will focus on the expression of basic ideas. Lecture
5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-007 
Basic Sounds and Spelling of English
The aim of this course is for students to learn how to identify and say American English sounds
in spoken and printed communication. Students will develop listening skills to distinguish
individual English sounds in words. Students will also learn the English alphabet to know
how sounds are represented in English. Students will then apply this knowledge to producing
sounds in words and structured conversation to be understandable to familiar listeners, and
to interpret standard combinations of sounds into printed text. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
ELCI-009 
Basic English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the basic level on an as needed basis.
Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-011 
Beginner Writing and Language Analysis
In Beginner Writing and Language Analysis students increase their knowledge and control
of basic grammatical structures in writing. This course focuses on the content, structure and
organization of sentences and basic paragraphs. Students will practice and improve their skills
in the writing process, including prewriting, writing, revision, and editing techniques. Lecture
6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

178	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

Academic Support

ELCI-013 
Beginner Reading and Vocabulary
In this course, students will learn reading skills and also build word study and communication skills at the beginner level. Students interact with other students and with the text through
various speaking and writing activities. Word study activities will support vocabulary development. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ELCI-037 
High Intermediate Inquiry-based Language Tasks
In this course students examine the use of language necessary in completing projects such as
simple experiments or cultural comparisons. Students transition from practicing basic selfexpression through project work to beginning to use the conventional academic language to
report on inquiry projects. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ELCI-015 
Beginner Speaking and Listening
Through listening, students develop vocabulary and schema to discuss a variety of topics and
familiar situations. Listening comprehension exercises focus on listening for salient information, drawing inferences and conclusions, and making connections between ideas. Speaking
exercises focus on the ability to explain and elaborate concepts. Lecture 5, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

ELCI-039 
High Intermediate English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the high intermediate level on an as
needed basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

ELCI-017 
Beginner Inquiry-based Language Tasks
This course introduces students to the concepts, questions, and methods that are used in inquiry-based learning. Basic language functions are integrated to complete practical, challenging
projects and assignments that connect students to real-world audiences. Students are expected
to take an active role in the learning process, both within and outside the classroom. Lecture
3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-019 
Beginner English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the beginner level on an as needed basis.
Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-021 
Intermediate Writing and Reading
Intermediate Reading and Writing will help develop the reading skills and strategies needed
for academic and general reading in English. Students will work on improving comprehension. Materials will include selections of various types and genres. This class will also focus on
developing an academic style of writing in English. Students will write and revise a number of
essays during this course and will also be evaluated on their ability to write clearly, cohesively, and meaningfully with adequate control of grammar and vocabulary. Lecture 6, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-023 
Intermediate Language Analysis and Accuracy
In Intermediate Language Analysis and Accuracy students increase their knowledge of grammatical structures and improve control of using those structures in speaking and writing. This
course focuses on accuracy and meaningful use of grammatical structures in different contexts.
Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-025 
Intermediate Speaking and Listening
Students will develop listening, discussion and note-taking skills to prepare for academic
coursework, participate in small group discussions, and complete projects, both group and
individual. Assignments include listening to recordings or other media and developing a discussion on a particular topic. Lecture 5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-027 
Intermediate Inquiry-based Language Tasks
In this course, students continue to explore the process of inquiry as a means of discovery and
learning. Students will examine current issues and topics created from textbook and RIT and
Rochester community resources by completing short inquiry-based projects which draw together reading, speaking, listening and writing skills. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-029 
Intermediate English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the intermediate level on an as needed
basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-031 
High Intermediate Writing and Reading
High Intermediate Reading and Writing will improve students’ reading fluency. Students will
discuss texts in class, write journals as responses to the texts, summarize main ideas, and complete assignments based on the readings. Students will learn the elements of rhetorical styles
and the steps of the writing process in order to produce clear, cohesive and meaningful writing. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-033 
High Intermediate Language Analysis and Accuracy
In High Intermediate Language Analysis and Accuracy students increase their knowledge of
advanced grammatical structures and improve control of using those structures in speaking
and writing. This course focuses on accuracy and meaningful use of advanced grammatical
structures in different contexts. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-035 
High Intermediate Speaking and Listening
In this course, students acquire the listening, note-taking and discussion skills necessary for
academic classwork. Students learn the conventions of academic discussion in order to question, analyze and respond to authentic listening material. Students learn to effectively present
with a clear point of view, incorporating appropriate sources. Lecture 5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)

	

ELCI-080 
Intensive English-Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for students in the ELCI program on an as
needed basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-098 
Intensive English-Orientation
The ELC Orientation Program accommodates new beginner and intermediate level ELC international students by providing them with basic information about immigration laws, academic
expectations of university classes and academic workload, health and safety, campus resources,
and living and studying at RIT in Rochester, NY. Students will practice language skills for cultural and academic situations. Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-099 
Intensive English - Independent Study
This course is for students in the ELCI program who want to study specialized topics on an as
needed basis. Independent Study 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCI-501 
ELC Full-Time Course
ELC Full-Time Course Lecture 12, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-012 
Advanced Writing and Reading
This advanced writing and reading course is designed for international students to develop,
practice, and perfect their academic writing and reading skills at the college level. This course
concentrates on the content, structure and organization of academic paragraphs and essays of
different types, as well as on the language skills and reading strategies necessary for efficient
processing of academic texts. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-014 
Advanced Language Analysis and Accuracy
In Advanced Language Analysis and Accuracy students rehearse and perfect skills to apply
complex grammatical structures effectively in various writing and speaking assignments on a
college level. Emphasis is also placed on meta-cognitive skills needed to analyze and explain
complex grammatical structures and usage. Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-016 
Advanced Speaking and Listening
In this course, students develop their listening, note-taking and discussion skills needed for
academic classwork. Students will also practice expressing their point of view with sufficient
evidence and coherent development of ideas. Emphasis will be on effective presentation skills,
including accuracy in spoken work. Lecture 4, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-017 
Advanced Speaking and Listening Lab
In this lab students will improve their listening, note-taking, pronunciation and discussion
skills which are being developed in classwork activities. Students will participate in group
work and discussions which will allow them to express ideas and opinions. Lab 2, Credits 0
(Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-018 
Advanced Inquiry-based Language Tasks
This course explores the inquiry process in general as well as the utility of different methods
for investigating various topics and issues. Students determine and analyze the various linguistic conventions needed in academic projects and tasks such as simple research or academic
description. Students are expected to actively engage in their own learning. Lecture 3, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-020 
Advanced English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the advanced level on an as needed
basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-022 
Academic Writing and Reading
Students will practice various techniques to improve their writing in preparation for academic work and to understand and process the academic readings encountered in RIT academic
courses. Coursework will include reading and analyzing the structure of academic persuasive essays and articles and writing academic persuasive essays. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

179

Academic Support

ELCA-024 
Academic Language Analysis and Accuracy
Academic Language Analysis and Accuracy is designed for international students with an
advanced level of English proficiency. The course presents a review of grammar topics and
speaking/writing strategies to enhance students’ grammar, speaking, writing, and meta-cognitive skills. The course prepares students for college level work in their academic classes.
Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-026 
Academic Speaking and Listening
In this course, students listen to lectures and idea-based discussions and compare and contrast
arguments and recognize overall connections among ideas, including supporting details, anecdotes, and natural digressions. Students distinguish between speaker purposes such as eliciting
debate or inquiry vs. argumentation or exposition. Students lead discussions and make presentations incorporating conceptual material and sources from listening and reading. Lecture
4, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-028 
Academic Inquiry-based Language Tasks
This course deepens the uses the inquiry process to develop necessary language skills of critical thinking used in academic settings. Students will listen to and read academic selections and
evaluate their assumptions and form their own points of view as they develop their speaking and
writing skills in inquiry-based projects and tasks. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-030 
Academic English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the academic level on an as needed
basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-032 
Advanced Academic Writing and Reading
This course will prepare students for entry or continuation in their academic discipline. This
course will emphasize useful reading strategies that form the basis of scholarly writing processes, a vital key to success in any academic program. Students will leave this course more
proficient practiced, skilled, and critical in their writing. Lecture 6, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
ELCA-034 
Advanced Academic Language Analysis and Accuracy
Advanced Academic Language Analysis and Accuracy is designed for international students
with an advanced level of English proficiency. In order to improve effectiveness, power and
flow of academic communication, students explore and analyze language style through integrated academic reading and writing tasks. Lecture/Lab 5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-036 
Advanced Academic Speaking and Listening
In this course, students learn the conventions of academic discussion. Students will be exposed
to a variety of academic listening materials, including guest speakers, on- campus lectures and
community events and will be assessed on their ability to comprehend, synthesize, and respond
critically to the information provided. Students will also lead their own academic lectures in
their areas of expertise. Lecture 4, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-037 
Advanced Academic Speaking and Listening Lab
This lab will further enhance students’ academic discussion skills learned in class. They will listen to lectures and engage in conversational activities which will be an extension of their course
material. Students will investigate related topics and lead their own round-table discussions.
Accuracy in pronunciation is a goal for spoken work. Lab 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-038 
Advanced Academic Inquiry-based Language Tasks
This course is designed to look more closely at the diverse methods of inquiry while refining
international students’ linguistic skills used for critical thinking, reading, speaking, and writing
in an academic setting to solve problems of university life and the larger community. Students
generate their own inquiry-based projects to form questions and learn how to articulate and
discuss their methods and findings. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-040 
Advanced Academic English - Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for the advanced academic level on an as
needed basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-080 
English for Academic Purposes-Special Topics
This course is for the development of special topics for students in the ELCA program on an
as needed basis. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-091 
Graduate Writing and Reading
In this course, students examine the language used to understand and produce graduate-level
writing. Students rehearse and apply linguistic and rhetorical strategies. Students will leave
this course better prepared to address the variety of reading and writing assignments required
in graduate programs. Lecture 5, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

180	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

ELCA-093 
Graduate Spoken Communication
This course is designed for international graduate students to further practice developing communication skills in English in order to participate fully in academic discussions. (Co-requisites:
ELCA-094 or equivalent course.) Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-094 
Graduate Spoken Communication Lab
The purpose of the lab is to provide students with additional practice and targeted instruction in academic “speaking”, i.e. discussions, seminars, presentations and project work. The
instructor works with individual students to improve accuracy, intelligibility and coherence
with respect to topics in their fields. (Co-requisites: ELCA-093 or equivalent course.) Lab 2,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-095 
Graduate Research Writing
The purpose of the course is to lead students through the process of developing a research
paper. Students read a variety of research papers to identify the common organizational patterns and rhetorical forms. The course is also a workshop in which the instructor works with
individual students to plan, write and revise a research paper using appropriate formal academic
language and citations of referenced material. Lecture 3, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-096 
Research Writing Lab
The purpose of the lab is to provide students with targeted instruction in research paper writing.
Students work with a variety of scholarly articles in their fields in order to identify organizational patterns and rhetorical forms specific to their field. The instructor works with individual
students to improve accuracy and coherence, as well as use of source material in their academic
writing. Lab 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-097 
Graduate Written and Spoken Communication
This course prepares students for study at the graduate level. Students examine and practice
the language used in research writing and presentations at the graduate level. Students study
rhetorical conventions and moves as well as linguistic devices which realize these rhetorical
purposes. Students conduct research in their field or area of interest and engage in discussion
and comparative analysis of the conventions of writing across various fields. Students produce
written literature reviews, summaries, data analyses and short analytical writing assignments
to rehearse and apply linguistic and rhetorical strategies. Students participate in discussions
of academic texts and presentations on their research. Lecture 7, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring,
Summer)
ELCA-098 
Acad English-Orientation
The ELC Orientation Program provides new ELC international students with linguistically
advanced information about immigration laws, academic expectations of university classes
and academic workload, health and safety, campus resources and living and studying at RIT
in Rochester, NY. Students will analyze and discuss cultural and academic situations and their
implications. Lecture, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELCA-099 
Academic English - Independent Study
This course is for students in the ELCA program who want to study specialized topics on an as
needed basis. Independent Study 2, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Recreation and Wellness

Recreation and Wellness
Index
WDAN	Dance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WFIT	Fitness.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WHLS	 Health and Safety. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
WHWS	 Health and Wellness Seminars.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WINT	 Interactive Adventures.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WREC	 Lifetime Recreation Activities. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WMAR	 Martial Arts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
WMIL	 Military Sciences .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

181
182
183
184
184
187
190
190

Course numbering: RIT courses are generally referred to by their alphanumeric registration
label. The four alpha characters indicate the discipline within the college. The final three digits
are unique to each course and identify whether the course is noncredit (less than 099), lower division (100-299), upper division (300-599), or graduate level (600 and above).
Unless otherwise noted, the following courses are offered annually. Specific times and dates can
be found in each semester's schedule of courses. Prerequisites/corequisites are noted in parentheses near the end of the course description.

Dance
WDAN-002 
Advanced Ballet
Advanced Ballet is for students with 5 or more years of formal training. This class will focus
on the various ballet movements to solidify fundamental techniques to more complex poses
and styles. Each week, choreography will be introduced that will incorporate classical, contemporary and modern styles to challenge, refine and enhance each dancer’s skill level. **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-006 
Ballroom Dance
This course is designed to introduce you to foundation figures in several different partner
dances. Smooth Dances include Foxtrot, Waltz, Tango, Viennese Waltz & Quickstep. Ballroom
Latin dances include Rumba, Cha cha, Samba & Swing. The Latin Dance Class will cover Salsa,
Merengue, Bachata & Cha cha. Attention will be paid to understanding music, and how the
movement fits the music, and lead and follow techniques. Major course objectives include: Body
and self-awareness, how to mix well with the same and opposite sexes, boosting self confidence,
developing natural body rhythms and improving posture and poise. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-007 
Advanced Ballroom Dance
This advanced course is designed for students who have participated in formal ballroom training or have successfully completed the Beginner Ballroom class at RIT. The focus is on a
mixture of melodies and Latin rhythms to give the student an overall feel for social dancing
and partner compatibility. The intent is to create a sense of student competency as an above
average ballroom dancer. Major course objectives include mastering dances such as the Foxtrot,
Merengue, Swing, Salsa, Jazz, Tango, Waltz, Cha Cha, and Jitterbug. This course will address
speed, advanced movement and partner roles. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See
Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-009 
Latin Dance
This Latin dance class will introduce the salsa, meringue, bachata and cha cha. Focus will be
on the learning and mastering each dance with a partner. Latin dance forms which have their
origin in Latin American countries (Central and South America) are known as Latin dances. These dances are categorized into social and ballroom dances. The adjectives which best
describe the different Latin dance types are expressive, passionate, suggestive and romantic.
No previous dance experience required. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-012 
Jazz Dance
This course provides students with a wide range dance vocabulary which is created from ballet, modern dance and ethnic traditions. The styles of Bob Fosse and the fall and rebound of
Jose Limon are a basis for this jazz course. The course will focus on the basic, intermediate
and some advanced movements of contemporary jazz dance to help enable students to experience successful and enjoyable jazz dancing. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

	

WDAN-030 
Hip Hop Advanced
Hip Hop dance refers to styles primarily danced to hip hop music or that have evolved as a
part of the hip hop culture. Hip hop dances are often considered street dances because of how
they were formed and are being practiced. This hip hop class offers intermediate to more
advanced skills that will encourage students to use their bodies in ways that help to develop/
execute different stylistic techniques. This class is intended for students with at least 2 yrs. of
dance experience. This class is high-paced, challenging and allows students to emphasize their
creative rhythmic talents. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-031 
Hip Hop Dance
Hip Hop dance refers to styles primarily danced to hip hop music or that have evolved as a part
of the hip hop culture. Hip hop dances are often considered street dances because of how they
were formed and are being practiced. This hip hop class offers basic to more advanced skills
that will encourage students to use their bodies in ways that help to develop/execute many
different stylistic techniques. This class is high-paced and challenging and allows students to
emphasize their creative rhythmic talents. As hip hop is a broad genre in dance studios the
instructor has the freedom/room for personal interpretation thus allowing the class to be highly
creative. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-033 
Street Jazz
Street Dance Technique is exactly what the name implies, an artfully fierce fusion of dance
styles into a singular yet evolving technique. The fundamentals learned here can be tailored
and applied to any dance style. Street Jazz offers a fun, judgment free environment to learn
and create new and interesting dance moves while vibin’ to cutting edge tracks. Students will
have the opportunity to influence both the predominant dance style of the each class and the
music. Come explore the dancer within and possibly discover your own dance swag! LEVITAS!
**Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-035 
Dance Choreo and Performance
Will allow students to apply dance concepts (to develop body strength, agility, coordination,
problem solving-skills, self-confidence, formation and staging along with choreography and
appreciation of movement as an art form) in depth and allow for increased opportunity for
skill development, creativity and understanding of dance concepts. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-037 
Irish Step
Often marked with a blur of flashing feet, Irish step dancing has emerged from the pubs of
Ireland to the international stage. This course teaches the style of dance made famous by the
shows Riverdance and Lord of the Dance. In addition to being introduced to the rich history
of Irish dance, students will learn soft shoe, hard shoe and ceili (group) dances. Be prepared
for a great cardiovascular workout. Irish dance requires endurance, coordination and strength.
The first dances (reels, jigs and slip jigs) are taught in soft shoe. These dances begin to teach
the fundamentals of Irish dance. As you progress, you will start to learn more complex soft
shoe dances, and then move onto learning hard shoe dances (treble jigs and hornpipes). **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-042 
Swing Dance
This course is an introduction of two American Swing dance styles: East Coast Swing and
Lindy Hop. The format will include seven weeks of East Coast Swing and seven weeks of Lindy
Hop. American Swing dance is best known for group dances and competitions. This course
will introduce single basic and triple basic steps, the pretzel, tuck turns, free spins, swings out
and in, Lindy circles, side by side Charleston, front to back Charleston and wring out the rag
and pop. *Note: No previous dance experience necessary and no need to register with a partner.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WDAN-045 
Argentine Tango
Tango Dancing will focus on dancing comfortably and expressively to traditional tango music
in a social setting. Argentine Tango traditionally stresses improvisation over repetition of set
patterns. Students will progress from simple walking exercises to an introduction to simple
steps and figures that are idiomatic of Argentine tango. Once students are comfortable with
basic figures and a connection to the music and their partner, we will progress to more complex sequences built up from the basics. We will emphasize the spontaneous discovery of these
sequences as a creative response in the moment to the music and to our partners over the
route memorization of rigid choreography. Students will learn the art of dancing expressively
while also respecting the boundaries of other dancers on the floor. Navigation - or floor craft is an essential skill to master in order to enjoy dancing in a crowded room. Upon completion
of the class, students will feel comfortable dancing at a tango social dance along side experienced tango dancers. *Note: This is a Co-Ed Class environment.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

181

Recreation and Wellness

WDAN-048 
Tap Dance
Rhythm, technique, and musicality are the three areas of tap dance emphasized in this course.
Whether you are brand new to tap or have previous experience, this course challenges students of all levels. Each level will receive tap steps and variations appropriate for their level.
Beginners will learn basic steps, shuffles, ball changes, flaps, Maxie Fords, buffalos, and turns.
Intermediate and advanced technique include wings, pullbacks (pickups), more intricate footwork, directional changes, and challenging variations. Styles include soft shoe, waltz clog, swing
tap, musical theater and urban. *Note: Tap shoes are required.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WFIT-037 
Personal Training
This course is designed for students who desire "1-on-1" Personal Training Services who wish
to enhance their current fitness level or better improve upon their quality of life by participating in weekly Personal Training and independent workout sessions. Students will learn
safe and appropriate exercise methods and techniques and will possess the ability to pursue
regular independent exercise programs at the conclusion of this course. This course offers 15
individual Personal Training contact hours as well as a requirement to complete additional
training hours through independent study/work outside of the time working with a Personal
Trainer. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Fitness

WFIT-041 
Functional Training
Simply defined, functional training involves compound (multi-joint) exercises that are meant
to simulate common movements or tasks performed as part of our daily lives. This class will
focus on skill development of many functional movements involving pushing, pulling, squatting, carrying and lifting. Because functional training movements involve multiple joints and
muscle groups, workouts can be accomplished in shorter periods of time and generally require
constant engagement of the “core” musculature. Each class session will involve a warm-up,
skill development session and a specified workout of the day. All skill levels are welcome, however this course is recommended for those looking to explore their limits. **Fee: A course fee
applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)

WFIT-001 
Power Sculpt
This fitness course is designed to facilitate cardiovascular fitness as well as increase muscular strength, endurance and flexibility. All aerobics classes combine a balance of high and low
impact moves that include a sequence of muscular strengthening and stretching exercises. In
addition to the benefits of improved heart and lung function, students will have an opportunity to burn calories, increase muscular strength and endurance, and increase flexibility.
Throughout the course students will be encouraged to work at individual paces, utilizing high
or low impact moves where appropriate. Through instructor-led group movements, with the
use of music, brief explanations of basic aerobic principles, definitions and guidelines for proper
technique will be covered. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WFIT-022 TurboKick
Want to burn 700 calories in a 50 minute class? If yes, Turbo kick is perfect for you. You will
love the music which keeps the energy high and the calories burning. This is an ultra-effective
workout that strengthens upper and lower body. If you are looking to tone and condition your
whole body, this is the workout for you. It is also an intense ab workout since every punch
comes from the core. This class is offered at over 2,000 fitness clubs in the United States. **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WFIT-023 
Power Cardio Kickboxing
This kickboxing class is a Tae-Bo style class which includes various punch and kick movements, sports conditioning drills and core conditioning. This intense, high energy program
is designed to provide an excellent total body workout using a kickboxing format. Any fitness
level can participate. *Note: Boxing gloves and bags are NOT utilized in this course.* **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-024 Insanity
You’ve seen the infomercials, you’ve heard about the workouts, now its time to try it! Insanity™
pushes you beyond what you thought was possible with a high intensity anaerobic interval class
with both high and low impact modifications for ALL Fitness levels. Participants will experience MAX interval training with explosive cardio and plyometric drills in addition to intervals
of strength, power, and resistance. Additional strength, ab and core training techniques will
help you transform your body. Throughout the course students will be encouraged to work at
individual paces, utilizing high or low impact moves where appropriate. Through instructor-led
group movements, with the use of music, brief explanations of basic aerobic principles, definitions and guidelines for proper technique will be covered. This is a great class for someone
who does not like to follow choreography. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WFIT-028 
Cardio, Strength and Core
This class will provide a variety of cardio work outs along with a mix of high intensity interval
training (HIIT) core strengthening and conditioning. High-intensity interval training (HIIT)
describes any workout that alternates between intense bursts of activity and fixed periods of
less-intense activity or even complete rest. According to a 2011 study presented at the American
College of Sports Medicine Annual Meeting, just 2 weeks of high-intensity intervals improves
your aerobic capacity as much as 6 to 8 weeks endurance training. Because the intervals are
short, you will be working hard the whole time. The trade-off is this format offers seasoned
exercisers a new challenge and new exercisers a quick way to see results. **Fee: A course fee
applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)

182	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

WFIT-055 Kickboxing
This course is designed to develop physical fitness, strength, stamina, power, speed, endurance and flexibility. Students will have the opportunity to develop self-defense skills by utilizing
the combination of boxing and karate techniques. Instructors will introduce basic kicking and
punching skills and combine the element of aerobic activity with music to provide an outstanding work- out. Students will be encouraged to enhance their overall health, thus helping them
look and feel good about themselves. Teaching methods include explanation, demonstration,
program guidance and motivational lecturing. Boxing gloves are required and can be purchased
locally (students must provide their own gloves). Instructor will provide purchasing information. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-058 
Indoor Cycling
The Indoor Cycling: Essentially is a form of exercise with classes focusing on the energy zones:
endurance, strength, intervals, high intensity (race days) and recovery, that involve using a
special stationary exercise bicycle with a weighted flywheel. Because Indoor Cycling provides
both high-intensity workouts and active recovery, without stress to the joints often associated
with running, participants can experience a personalized ride every class. By focusing on specific training objectives during each class, students can map out a training plan to maximize
results. *Note: Indoor Cycling classes may vary in terms of general course content based on
student/class interest (some Core/Abdominal work and Sculpting/Resistance training may be
added to course content).* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WFIT-069 
Rowing for Fitness
The sport of competitive rowing dates back hundreds of years and is one of the oldest competitive sports still in existence today. In this class students will begin by learning proper rowing
technique and will then move on to complete weekly rowing assignments to enhance their
overall fitness and to improve their general rowing competency. Class time will be spent utilizing modern rowing ergometers and software to track rowing progress and in the fitness center
completing strength programs to enhance rowing capacity. Students will have the opportunity
to compete in informal in-class racing between other class participants and also compete against
other rowers worldwide by utilizing online racing venues. While this class is well suited for novice rowers, more experienced individuals are also welcome to enroll. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-070 
Swimming for Fitness
This fitness and conditioning activity course is designed for students who enjoy the venue of
swimming to develop cardiovascular health. Designed for intermediate-advanced swimmers.
This is NOT an instructional swimming class. The course will focus on: General aquatic fitness;
stretching; all swimming stroke refinement and development; lap swims, sprints, combination of times laps and outlined swim practices. Cool down sessions will take place followed by
ideas for muscular strength and endurance development (outside of aquatic environment).
This course is a perfect fit for individuals who wish to pursue physical fitness development in
a "non-impact" situation. *Note: Students must provide their own swimming attire.* **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Recreation and Wellness

WFIT-075 
Sports Performance Training for Athletes
This course is designed for students with an athletic background looking to utilize current training methods to enhance their physical performance. Course work will involve group training
sessions and will take place in the Hale Andrews Students Life Center and Gordon Field House,
as well as adjacent track and field complexes. Students can expect each class to offer a variety
of challenging exercises and/or drills that will focus on aspects of health and skill based fitness. All exercises and training programs will be modified to meet the individual needs of each
student, but it is recommended that course participants already possess a base level of fitness
prior to registering in the course. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for
course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-076 
Intro to Weight Training
Basic weight training fundamentals offer beginners/intermediates the chance to build strength
through method discovery. Content includes: stretching; flexibility; spotting; safety; free
weights; cybex; the different kinds of program designs; and cardiovascular development.
Course design will focus on individual need and desire, leading to unique and successful program designs. Instructors will present information on muscle development, basic CV training;
use of free weights and Cybex equipment. Highlight: Individual program effort. Class work
involves initial orientation, handouts/discussion, definitions, Cybex station techniques; free
weight specifics, and routine development for total body work. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-082 
Core Fusion
Currently PiYo now Core Fusion: This course dramatically transforms the body to help look,
feel and perform better. Core Fusion is an athletic blend of Pilates, Yoga and so much more?
It includes modifications for the group exercise environment, yet also offers progression to
challenges for all levels of student participants (Faculty/Staff are welcome too).Core Fusion
exercises are selected and balanced through strategic variations (pose angles and application
of force), with each specific movement. Each Core Fusion class session builds on the last to
increase exercise adherence and avoid hitting "plateaus". **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS
bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-085 Pilates
This course will progress from Pilates fundamentals and basic exercises to a traditional intermediate level workout by the final class. Pilates focuses on abdominal strength, stability of
the pelvis, flexibility and balance. Mindful, intelligent movement and a deeper understanding
of your body is the goal. Relaxation and some stretching may be added to the traditional mat
work of Joseph H. Pilates. An Intermediate section assumes that the student has knowledge in
Pilates fundamentals and the mechanics of basic classic exercises. Class will be more vigorous
and will begin to develop concepts of flow and transition. The class will move and flow more
than the beginner level.*Note: Previous experience in Pilates or a previous class in Pilates is
required for Intermediate sections.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes
for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-086 
Pilates Bootcamp
Pilates Bootcamp will combine classic Pilates with traditional Boot Camp exercises, such as plymetrics, squats, lunges, and resistance work. Classes will be fast-paced and dynamic, providing a
total body workout, while remaining true to the Pilates principles of Control, Concentration and
Centering. Students will work to improve not only core strength, but also balance, muscle tone,
flexibility, alignment and posture, while conditioning the total body. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-088 
Extreme Fitness
Extreme Fitness is an exciting indoor full-body fitness program that will challenge, tone and
trim your body in 15 intense weeks. Whether you are a novice or an athlete looking for a new
challenge, this class will help you reach your fitness goals! Definitely challenging-working core
muscle groups, endurance, PiYo type activities-they are all part of this newly designed, very
dynamic class. Boredom is not an option in this class. By combining calisthenics, plyometrics, resistance training, Cardio, relay races, partner drills--you get an action packed workout
in every session. Similar to "bootcamp" but very much designed for those who want the "ultimate" fitness experience! **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-091 
Ninja Training
This course is inspired by the recent surge in popularity of obstacles course style races and the
practice of free running as a means to enhance one’s physical fitness. Students in this course
will begin with fundamental movement and balance skills and will eventually progress to
informal in-class obstacle course races with elements similar to those seen in the popular hit
television show, American Ninja Warrior. All abilities are welcome to participate since all skills
and movements will be custom tailored to meet in the needs of each individual student. This
course will not have any martial art component, but you will learn how to move like a ninja!
*Note: This course takes place off campus at Rochester Parkour, 1344 University Avenue,
Rochester, NY. RIT does not provide transportation however car-pooling does exist.* **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

	

WFIT-093 
Sunrise Yoga
Yoga is a practice of uniting the mind, body and spirit. As such, this class focuses on physical
postures as well as yogic philosophies as taught through the eight limbs of yoga. Primarily,
this class is about building a solid foundation in basic yoga poses and is appropriate for those
who are new to yoga as well as students that are working on refining their yoga practice. The
class puts emphasis on developing strength and flexibility through asana, conscious breathing
in pranayama, relaxing and de-stressing through meditation. Pose modifications are demonstrated and encouraged. This class alternates in working at a moderate pace in the vinyasa
style of connecting movement and breath while moving continuously; and in working through
sequences of postures held for several breath cycles, focusing on precise principles of biomechanics. Attendance is required. Recommended clothing is comfortable and loose fitting.
Mats and props are provided. Music is used to create an environment appropriate for mindfulness of movement and reduce external distractions. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill.
See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WFIT-095 
Vinyasa Power Yoga
Vinyasa Power Yoga is built upon traditional yoga poses, while at the same time adding several
variations and extensions to the poses along the way. Unlike meditative yoga, the pace of this
class provides a steady flow through a series of vinyasas (downward dog, plank, and upward
dog) that keep the body engaged in a steady flow of movement. The pace of this movement
offers cardiovascular conditioning, as well as an opportunity to challenge your strength and
build your flexibility. The practice will offer you the opportunity to focus on your inner self
and integrate and balance your body, mind, and spirit as one being. All levels welcome. **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Health and Safety
WHLS-010 
CPR and First Aid
This course is designed to provide certification by the American Red Cross for CPR and First
Aid. Upon successful completion of the course, students will receive certification cards for CPR
and for First Aid. Students will be presented with information on the following skills that apply
to: Infants, Children and Adults: Rescue Breathing, Blocked Airway for a conscious/unconscious person, CPR, responding to an emergency situation, controlling bleeding and splinting
techniques. Class sessions include the use of video tapes, lectures, demonstrations, partner
practice and skill evaluation (by the instructor). All equipment (mannequins, mats, wraps) are
provided by RIT. *Note: "CPR Pro" is offered optionally.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS
bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WHLS-012 
Advanced CPR and First Aid
This advanced CPR course is designed to provide certification by the American Red Cross for
CPR for the Professional Rescuer and First Aid. Upon successful completion of the course,
students will receive certification cards for CPR for the Professional Rescuer and for First Aid.
Class sessions are 2 hour formats. Students will be presented with information on the following skills that apply to: Infants, Children and Adults: Rescue Breathing, Blocked Airway for a
conscious/unconscious person, CPR, AED, 2 Person CPR, Use of the Bag Valve Mask, Triple
Airway maneuver, responding to an emergency situation, controlling bleeding and splinting
techniques. Class sessions include the use of video tapes, lectures, demonstrations, partner
practice and skill evaluation (by the instructor). *Note: All equipment (mannequins, mats,
wraps, face masks) are provided by RIT and included in the course fee. Students must purchase the textbook.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee
information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WHLS-030 
Water Safety Instruction
Water Safety Instruction (WSI), a certification course through The American Red Cross, enables
students to teach swimming and lifesaving classes following successful completion. Preparation
for teaching proper Red Cross classes follows instruction in lifeguarding skill review, strokes,
teaching methods, class structuring and organization. class prerequisite. Assignments, quiz
evaluation and a written course final are given. An intriguing course exploring teaching methods and problems, WSI allows actual teaching experience within the class curriculum. *Note:
Current Lifeguarding certification is required as a class prerequisite.* **Fee: A course fee
applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

183

Recreation and Wellness

Health and Wellness Seminars
WHWS-001 
Wellness for Life
This core wellness course is designed specifically to assist students in making healthy decisions
regarding lifestyle behaviors. Students will be presented with wellness information (multidimensional) that will help students prepare for co-op, job interviews, the workplace and the
building of healthy, lifelong relationships. Key areas that are covered: Behavior change strategies, stress, high risk behaviors, physical wellness, emotional wellness, psychological well
being, safety and spirituality. Unique in design, this course meets once per week and includes
ice breakers, instructional sessions and interactive group activities. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WHWS-002 
Wellness Challenge Exam
This core wellness course is designed specifically as a "test out" option for students wishing to
complete a wellness activity class for graduation. Strong wellness background is required (multidimensional). *Note: Textbooks are available to prepare for the exam in the RIT Bookstore
(Wellness: Concepts and Applications by Anspaugh, Hamrick & Rosato).* Students should
contact Dugan Davies at: dugan.davies@rit.edu , SLC 1260. Study guides are available in the
SLC Lobby. Students must contact the instructor directly for more info & set up exam date.
**Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WHWS-004 
Introduction to Massage Therapy
Massage Therapy is fast becoming an accepted part of many rehab programs & has been proven
beneficial in many acute and chronic medical conditions. It aids in the relief of stress, arthritis,
sports injuries, trauma and many other conditions of pain and discomfort. There are many
forms of massage: Medical, Orthopaedic, Sweedish, Therapeutic, Myofascial Trigger Point,
Myofascial Release & Accupressure, for examples. Licensed Massage Therapists trained in
New York go through extensive training in the US. They are REGISTERED and are BOARD
CERTIFIED after passing the State Boards. Most states require the therapist to have passed
the state tests in order to practice in the state they reside in. The vast majority of therapists go
on for additional training. Anyone can feel a need for some kind of therapy to relieve stress,
chronic or acute conditions. This course provides SIMPLE but effective methods of relieving
stress and the freedom of enjoying everyday activities. Welcome to a new and sacred adventure
that will promote your health and total well-being. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See
Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WHWS-012 
Personal Healthcare
This course is an introduction to the importance of independent, mature decision-making,
rights and responsibilities as a healthcare consumer. This course will help students to navigate the healthcare system including the continuity of care, health insurance under the new
ACA (Affordable Care Act), healthy lifestyles and sexual responsibility. **Fee: A course fee
applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)
WHWS-018 
How to Become Smoke Free
This course is a self-help, low stress and "no test" class. If you have tried to quit smoking before,
take comfort in the fact that most smokers try several times before successfully quitting. Your
past attempts are not failures, but rather a step in the process towards becoming a non-smoker!
The information presented in this class will help to ease your way through the quitting process. Discussions will include: Techniques to become "smoke free"; healthy behavior changes;
stress management strategies and more! So, join your friends and learn how to quit together!
*Note: Options to obtain nicotine replacement therapy are available through the N.Y. Quits
and RIT Student Health.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WHWS-020 
Dialogues on Spirituality
This course explores some spiritually-related topics, and shows how spirituality plays an important part in our daily life. It offers an opportunity to become more familiar with spiritual
teachings from various spiritual masters and beliefs, and to recognize areas in oneself that are
ripe for further growth. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WHWS-021 
Spirituality and Health
This interactive course, through multiple aspects of spiritual exploration, will focus on understanding some of the laws that govern all of life. A human is a four-fold being governed by
physical, mental, emotional and spiritual laws. When you learn to live and apply these teachings,
you solve many human problems. These self mastery techniques: Meditation, contemplation,
mysticism, color therapy, the power of intentions, sacred spaces, charkas, chanting, labyrinths,
dowsing, visualization, healing and developing intuition are aimed at the spirit which has no
boundaries and therefore is universal and non-denominational. This course focuses on the
discovery of the wisdom within and developing the capacity to sense, understand and tap into
the highest parts of yourself, others and the world around you. **Fee: A course fee applied via
SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WHWS-006 
Motivation and Leadership
What inspires you? Who motivates you? Would you like to learn more about how you can motivate others? Many people, past and present, stand out as great leaders, but what makes them
great? Each one of us can learn from our experiences and challenges, using these opportunities
to lead, inspire, and motivate in our own way. Can you? Register for this course and find out!
LEARN about leadership styles and discover your own along the way. EXPLORE what keeps
you motivated through stressful and challenging times. LEARN from past examples by examining great leaders-their characteristics, and their great speeches. GET STARTED on the road
to becoming a better leader and motivator! **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WHWS-022 
Meditation Practices
Learn and practice a variety of meditation techniques that develop mindfulness, concentration,
tranquility and insight. This approach to wellness is one that can assist you in reducing stress
and anxiety by the way of thought, contemplation and reflection. Through this course students
will gain an understanding of the physical as well as the emotional benefits of meditative practices. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WHWS-008 
Financial Fitness
Fitness doesn’t just have to mean working out in the gym. Learn how you can become financially fit! This course will give you that foundation. Learn about important topics that include:
the time value of money, budgeting, taxes, credit (good debt vs. bad debt), buying vs. leasing a car, banking, housing, financing college and much more. You will learn tools on how to
best manage your resources and gain a basic understanding of the complex world of personal
finances. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WINT-001 
Teambuilding Tools
Do you want to be an effective leader? Do you want additional resources and know-how that
make your leadership skills a step above the rest? Whether you are an aspiring leader, already
gravitate towards the head of the pack, or just want knowledge on tools that make teams better, this class is for you. This course will present and discuss how to create experiences in
team building without the benefit of having a ropes course. We will discuss the history and
use of experiential activities, stages of group development, activity briefing/debriefing and
safety considerations. We will spend time setting up and experiencing a variety of activities
and games that require little or no props and can be easily transported. We will discuss where
to find additional activities, curriculum ideas and how to use these activities and strategies to
make your own endeavors more successful.. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on
class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee
information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

WHWS-009 
Eating, Body Image and Food
This course focuses on healthy and unhealthy eating behaviors, body image, and attitudes
toward food. We will address factors which influence body image, dieting behaviors, cultural influences on eating and body image, obesity, eating disorders, and healthy eating. **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WHWS-010 
Friends, Foes and Lovers
This course is designed to provide students with educational concepts and strategies regarding relationships while keeping personal safety in mind. Instructors and students will explore
the topic of relationships (friends, dating, and partnerships) and being able to set appropriate
boundaries so that relationships are able to thrive. Issues of Relationship violence, stalking and
sexual assault will also be addressed throughout the course.*Note: This course is taught by the
staff from the Center for Women and Gender.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See
Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

184	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

Interactive Adventures

WINT-004 
Wilderness Survival
This is an introductory course to wilderness survival using primitive skills. This class will
take place outdoors, and will integrate natural conditions and seasonal changes into teaching
(a.k.a rain or shine, day or eve). Students will learn time-honored mentoring techniques, cutting edge practices and traditional ecological knowledge to master an ancient understanding
of their environment and their role within. Students will leave this course with a strong base in
fire-building, shelter building, tracking and edible/medicinal plant I.D. to aidless navigation,
hunting, wood carving, wild crafting and wilderness cooking and Leave-No-Trace ethics. *Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Recreation and Wellness

WINT-005 
Backcountry Living
This is an introductory course in backcountry living. We will work in and out of the classroom
to incorporate essential outdoor skills involved in backcountry camping and overnight basics.
Students will leave this course with a strong base in fire-building; campsite selection and set up;
outdoor cooking; rope work; shelter building; wilderness first aid; hypo/hyperthermia prevention, detection and care; and Leave-No-Trace ethics. *Note: See Course Notes for additional
details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for
course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-007 
Intro to Permaculture Design
Permaculture is the study and practice of the way human beings, as individuals and
Communities, can participate in the creation of ethical, socially just, and ecological support
systems. We present a whole systems design approach that integrates plants, animals, buildings, people, communities, economies, and the landscapes that surround us through careful
analysis and thoughtful design. The course introduces students to the principles and practice of
permaculture design through collaboration on real-world projects with an eye towards repairing, restoring, and regenerating human ecosystems. *Note: See Course Notes for additional
details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for
course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-009 Orienteering
Orienteering The sport of Orienteering presents both physical and mental challenges while providing the participants with the fun of being outdoors, the challenge of being totally engaged
and the rewards of physical activity. As part of this course, participants will receive instruction
in map reading and interpretation, experience the enjoyment of the sport of "O" by participating in events, unlock the mysteries of the compass and receive coaching on techniques used
by experienced Orienteers to find control flags and avoid being "lost". All classes will involve
some classroom work as well as outdoor activity. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details
on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-010 
Maple Syrup and Our Environment
This class will explore maple syrup production — both by way of micro production and as the
yield of larger scale agriculture — as the product of a delicately strung web of environmental
factors. As such, this hands-on and in-the-woods exploration of how maple syrup is produced
will involve integrally related environmental topics and issues such as climate change, forest
ecology, invasive species, and broader issues of sustainability. Through both classroom lecture
and practical exercises in the woods, students will learn tree identification, the biology of sap
production, the role of weather patterns, nutritional benefits of maple syrup, and the history
of maple syrup production and its economic significance. Students will learn and actually carry
out the processes of identifying trees for tapping, harvesting sap, and converting the harvested
sap into their very own maple syrup. Students will learn outdoor preparedness, leave no trace
wilderness ethics, and use of snowshoes for winter foot- travel. *Note: See Course Notes for
additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-011 
Adventure Sampler
This class is a perfect way to experience a variety of adventure sports at an introductory level
without a semester-long commitment to an activity you are unfamiliar with. With the expert
guidance of a trained instructor, you will get to experience short modules that begin with the
most fundamental skills like basic outdoor clothing, equipment, and preparation, and progress to activities like hiking, orienteering, beginner canoeing, and more! This class will utilize
the “challenge by choice” philosophy and will focus on positive support and encouragement
to allow students to safely explore activities that might otherwise seem too daunting. If you
are new to adventure sports or just want a sampler of a variety of activities, this class is for
you. While activities may not be physically strenuous, students should be prepared for situations that might be psychologically challenging including being on deep water, heights, and
being in wilderness settings. Proof of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-012 
Intro to Bees and Beekeeping
Did you know that honey bees pollinate one third of the food we eat? Honey bees are complex
social organisms whose role in both our environment and economy is often under-recognized
and under-appreciated. Through both classroom lecture and practical experience, this class will
serve as an introduction to honey bees and beekeeping. We will explore the life cycle and social
habits of honey bees, basic bee-keeping skills, honey production and its nutritional benefits,
governmental legislation around pollinators, and the honey bee’s key role in global agriculture.
Furthermore, we will examine the declining honey bee population and its critical consequences
by way of investigating farming practices and individual behaviors that can either exacerbate
or help reverse this trend. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)

	

WINT-013 
Intro toTrail Running
This is an introductory course in trail running and is appropriate for all skill and experience
levels, particularly those new to the sport. Students will work in and out of the classroom to
engage in the best practices of trail running. Students will acquire basic knowledge of the keys
to the sport including; fitness, nutrition, trail running gear, proper trail use and an enhanced
knowledge of local parks and trail running resources. Students will leave this course with the
skill set to go out and become confident trail runners. Participation in this class requires proof
of health insurance.*Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.*
**Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-014 Hiking
In this class, students will learn all about and engage in the activity of wilderness hiking. Skills
taught will include outdoor preparedness including choosing proper clothing for the wilderness,
wilderness safety, proper nutrition for outings, reading weather, basic navigation and mapreading, hiking technique, Leave No Trace wilderness ethics as well as exposure to numerous
local parks and trail systems. Students must have proper clothing for outdoor excursions that
occur in varying weather conditions. Proof of health insurance is required to take this course.
*Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee
applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall,
Spring, Summer)
WINT-016 Backpacking
This class will impart basic backpacking skills such as fitting and properly packing your backpack, camping skills, and general outdoor awareness and preparedness. These skills will be put
to use on an overnight backpacking /camping trip. The difficulty of the hike will be based on
the abilities of the class. Participants should possess boots/shoes for hiking as well as clothing
appropriate for the wilderness. Proof of health insurance is required to take this course.*Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-017 
Backpacking Trail Maint
This course is designed to provide experience in backpacking and volunteer trail maintenance.
Students will learn how to choose proper gear, work together as a team and care for the trail
they are hiking on. Students will gain a basic knowledge of backpacking skills and equipment
selection, learn how to work with trail organizations and trail maintenance projects, learn to
demonstrate basic backpacking skills and gear terminology, participate in trail clean-up and
preservation, and practice "leave no trace" camping/hiking ethics. This course consists of both
(a) mandatory pre-trip session(s), as well as a weekend backpacking and trail maintenance
excursion. Basic backpacking and camping gear are provided. Participants should possess
boots/shoes for hiking as well as clothing appropriate for the wilderness. Proof of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class
meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-019 
Beginner Backpacking
Explore the forests with your home in your pack. Sleep in tents or lean-tos, cook on camp
stoves, and hike the trail as you learn about the lush history of the area. Class will focus on
the essentials of backcountry camping: planning, communication, and execution. Learn to
read the weather, a compass, and map; start fires using new and old tools; as well as interpret
the flora and fauna of the trail. This class will follow Leave No Trace principles. All food will
be provided. Hike requires the ability to walk for at least five hours with breaks. Participants
should possess boots/shoes for hiking as well as clothing appropriate for the wilderness. Proof
of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details
on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-021 Backpacking/Canoeing
This multi-activity course will involve a weekend wilderness trip consisting of both backpacking and open water canoeing; one day of one activity will be followed by one day of the other.
Topics addressed will include basic backcountry foot-travel, wilderness camping, outdoor
preparedness, paddling skills and canoe navigation, and Leave No Trace ethics.Participants
should possess boots/shoes for hiking as well as clothing appropriate for the wilderness. Proof
of health insurance is required to take this course.*Note: See Course Notes for additional details
on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

185

Recreation and Wellness

WINT-025 
Mountain Biking
Learn to mountain bike and improve your trail riding skills. Class highlights include: trail etiquette and safety, bike set-up, trail-side bike maintenance, control, balance, braking, weight
transfer, terrain and stunt navigation, high-speed cornering, attack and descent on hills, and
basic nutrition and hydration. Weekly group ride distances will be 5 - 7 miles per class, which
includes daily drills and skills. IMPORTANT NOTE: Students must provide their own transportation to and from the trail each week. All students must have trail-worthy mountain bike and
helmet. Class may be conducted on stationary spin bikes (indoors) when weather is unfavorable (determined by instructor). Proof of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-026 Bicycling
The main focus of this course will be on recreational cycling with an emphasis on cycling safety
and rules of the road. In addition, students will learn about bicycle parts and terminology, riding skills and techniques, how to ride in a group, and basic bike maintenance. Throughout the
class, students will be exposed to a variety of areas around Rochester where they can safely ride
their bikes, including pathways and some roads. Students must have their own bicycle (road,
hybrid, or mountain with road tires) in good mechanical condition, and equipped to meet all
pertinent laws for daytime riding. *Note: Proof of health insurance is required.* **Fee: A course
fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall)
WINT-028 
Bicycle Care and Maint
This course is taught as a hands-on introduction to building, caring for, maintaining and riding bicycles. Students are supplied with a basic bicycle repair kit and book which is theirs to
keep. The focus of the course is to use the repair kit and book to discover the mechanical systems of a bicycle including: breaks, drive train, derailleurs, bearings, wheel truing and more.
The 1st-4 wks. will involve building various makes and models of new bicycles. The remaining classes are spent working on your own bicycle. The final class is a bike ride to Rochester
via the Greenway Trail. Repair kit tools are designed for bikes 1995 and newer with external
gears. Bikes older than 1995 may require different tools to conduct class procedures. *Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-037 Bouldering
This course is designed to expose students to the sport of Bouldering in an amazing outdoor
setting. Climbing techniques, mental and physical preparedness, proper spotting and other safety techniques are presented. The sport of "Bouldering" is a type of rock climbing that
involves shorter climbs or "problems" that require strategy and physical ability to complete.
To protect falls for these shorter climbs, pads and spotters are used rather than ropes and harnesses. This is a physically demanding class! The first class meets at the Red Barn (required
meeting) followed by one or more trips to outdoor bouldering venue. Proof of health insurance
is required to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting
times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-039 
Rock Climbing Indoor
This class is designed to introduce and educate students about the sport of indoor rock climbing.
Subject matter includes a variety of climbing techniques and terminology, gear and equipment
use, as well as safety practices and protocols specific to the indoor climbing environment. Each
class will consist of a lecture, demonstration and practice components allowing students to learn
and practice the skills presented. All necessary gear and equipment will be provided. *Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-042 
Beginner Outdoor Rock Climbing
If you have little or no climbing experience or are a gym climber looking to learn what outdoor
rock climbing is all about, this course is for you. A major objective is to orient new climbers
to the systems, protocols, & foundational techniques of rock climbing. Skills taught include
knot tying, belaying, commands & safety checks, grips and effective footwork, and activities
to help develop confidence, trust and efficient climbing kinesthetics. Proof of health insurance
is required to take this course.*Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting
times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

186	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

WINT-043 
Intermediate Outdoor Rock Climbing
For students who have previous experience & want to take it to the next level, this course is for
you. A major objective of this course is to provide the foundations & rationales for the application of advanced climbing skills. Before traveling to a nearby crag, a meeting (required) will
take place at the Red Barn & will cover basic skills and trip logistics. The 1st day of the trip
will focus on active and passive familiarization, placement/evaluation, gear anchor systems
and equalization methods. The 2nd day will focus on advanced rappelling techniques and an
introduction to self rescue with remainder of the day spent on the rocks. Throughout the trip
students will be introduced to the larger concepts involved in top rope anchor construction,
rock climbing physics & risk management. All equipment & transportation is provided.Proof
of health insurance is required to take this course.*Note: See Course Notes for additional details
on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-050 Canoeing
This class involves instruction on canoe/equipment parts and terminology, water safety, launching and landing the canoe, paddle strokes and maneuvers, and opportunity to practice skills
on flat or slow moving water. Day trips may involve ventures onto moving water with sections
of mild white water (some isolated sections up to class II). Additional topics and skills taught
will include ferrying, eddying, basic rescue/recovery techniques, river features and hydrology,
and leave no trace wilderness ethics. Participants need to be comfortable both on and in the
water, and be able to swim. *Note: Proof of health insurance is required.***Fee: A course fee
applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall)
WINT-053 
Canoeing Camping
Camping meets canoeing: learn to experience how a canoe allows for unique access to otherwise impractical camping opportunities while being able to carry a payload greater than what
could be feasibly carried on your back. This class involves a required pre-trip training meeting
followed by a weekend-long trip involving backcountry camping. Skills to be covered include
basic paddling, safety and navigation, map reading and route-finding, camping skills such as
tenting, fire-building, camp-cooking, and water purification, and Leave No Trace Wilderness
Ethics. Students need to be comfortable on and in the water. Proof of health insurance is
required to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting
times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-055 
Beginner Kayaking
This class is taught as an introduction to kayaking. It is typically taught in the pool and covers the following skills: Kayak parts, accessories and terminology, wet exits, hip snaps, paddle
strokes, j-leans, Eskimo rescues and Eskimo rolls. All skills are taught in progression using
drills, games and exercises leading up to a full roll. This class is taught in white water kayaks.
All necessary gear and equipment is provided. Participants should expect to be in the water
each class. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A
course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-056 
Whitewater Kayaking
This course is an intermediate approach to whitewater kayaking. The participants should have
some, but not necessarily extensive, kayaking experience. Skills taught include the basics of
whitewater paddling, maneuvering, righting and rescue techniques, whitewater safety skills,
river reading/navigation, ferrying, eddying and peeling. This class will involve paddling on easy
to moderate whitewater. Depending on the skill level of the class, other more advanced skills
may be introduced. Students must be able to swim and be comfortable on and in the water.
Proof of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional
details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for
course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-058 
Sea Kayaking
Sea kayaks are long, narrow, seaworthy vessels that have a covered deck and, in lieu of the
maneuverability of a whitewater kayak, are designed to have higher cruising speed, cargo capacity, ease of straight-line paddling, and comfort for long journeys. This class will teach students
how to safely and effectively paddle a sea kayak and use this type of vessel for extended openwater trips. This class includes an overnight sea kayaking trip and involves camping that may be
in a wilderness environment Proof of health insurance is required to take this course.*Note: See
Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS
bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Recreation and Wellness

WINT-059 
Intro to Stand Up Paddleboarding
Stand Up Paddleboarding involves is an activity that is relatively easy to learn, and provides
a wide array of opportunity for leisure, fitness, and appreciation of the outdoors. This class
will focus on the culture and skills of Stand Up Paddleboarding. You can expect to learn all the
basic skills necessary to enjoy this sport on any body of flat water. Each class will deal with at
least one component of each: history, equipment, technical skills and language, etiquette and
safety. This class will meet both in the classroom and out on the water. Student should be able
to swim and feel comfortable on and in the water.Proof of health insurance is required to take
this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A
course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-060 Snowshoeing
This class is designed to utilize the sport of snowshoeing as a means of promoting and imparting
physical fitness, outdoor preparedness, outdoor winter skills and knowledge of our local parks
and natural resources. Students can expect to gain the necessary knowledge to continue enjoying this sport on their own. This class will take place various local trails and parks. In the event
of a "no snow" day, hiking will be the substitute activity for the day. Snowshoes are provided for
class use. Participants should possess sturdy boots for hiking as well as clothing appropriate
for a winter, wilderness environment. *Note: Proof of health insurance is required to take this
course. See Course Notes for any details on class meeting times. * **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-062 
Adirondack Hiking
Come hike some of the most beautiful trails the Northeast has to offer in the largest park in
the country. This class consists of a mandatory pre-trip meeting followed by a weekend trip
to the Adirondack State Park. The weekend will consist of day-hikes and overnights in lodgestyle accommodations. Skills introduced include: trail hiking, map reading, route finding, and
leave No Trace Wilderness Ethics. Participants should possess boots/shoes for hiking as well
as clothing appropriate for the wilderness. Proof of health insurance is required to take this
course.*Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course
fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0
(Fall, Spring)
WINT-065 
Beginning Cross Country Skiing
Learn to cross-country ski and develop the basic skills needed to move efficiently across flat
to hilly terrain (cross country skiing is different than downhill/alpine skiing). Designed for
beginners, this class will focus on developing the classic diagonal stride, which is the main
technique used by skiers to rhythmically propel themselves. Other skills taught will include
stopping, turning, and climbing. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting
times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-068 
Rock Climbing/Technical Skills
This class is designed for those with some outdoor climbing experience. The class will be taught
inside, but in simulated outdoor situations, covering such skills as anchor building and management; various belay methods and considerations; belay escapes and basic rescue skills;
mechanical advantage and hauling systems; and, above all, safety and its many components
in the climbing discipline. Climbing movement will only be covered inasmuch as it pertains to
rope work and other technical considerations. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details
on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-070 
Intro to Snowboarding
This class will focus on the skills and culture of Snowboarding. You can expect to learn all the
basic skills necessary to enjoy this sport at practically any ski and snowboarding resort. Each
class will deal with at least one component of each: history, equipment, technical skills and
language, on-hill etiquette and safety. This class will meet both in the classroom and out on
the hill. Proof of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for
additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-075 
Ice Climbing
Learn to scale frozen waterfalls! This class is designed to teach basic ice climbing skills including belaying, ice tool & crampon use as well as special skills & safety considerations particular
to climbing on ice. This class will involve pre-trip meetings followed by day trips to local frozen waterfalls for climbing. This class is appropriate for all experience levels and all necessary
gear & equipment is provided. Proof of health insurance is required to take this course. *Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

	

WINT-076 
Ice Climbing Adirondacks
Ice Climbing/Adirondacks is an introduction to ice climbing. The class will begin with a
required pre-trip meeting followed by a weekend trip to the Adirondack State Park for a weekend of climbing. Skills covered will include: Proper & effective use of crampons including
front-pointing and "French Technique", ice tool techniques, belays and rope work, & general
winter preparedness. This class is open to all skill levels. Proof of health insurance is required
to take this course. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.*
**Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WINT-085 
Wilderness First Aid
Whether you are an outdoor enthusiast, a trip leader, or just want to be better prepared to
prevent and deal with accidents and emergencies in the wilderness, Wilderness First Aid is a
must-have. This course uses both lecture and hands-on practice to provide a solid foundation
in the basics of backcountry medical care. Areas of focus include response and assessment,
musculoskeletal injuries, environmental emergencies, survival skills, soft tissue injuries, and
medical emergencies. No previous medical training is necessary. WFA certification is good
for two years. *Note: See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A
course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits
0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-086 
Wilderness First Responder
Wilderness First Responder is the perfect course for anyone working in a position of leadership
in an outdoor setting or for individuals who want a high level of wilderness medical training for
extended personal backcountry trips or expeditions. This is an 80-hour certification-granting
course that involves a comprehensive and in-depth look at the standards and skills of dealing
with emergencies in the backcountry. This includes response and assessment, musculoskeletal injuries, environmental emergencies and survival skills, soft tissue Injuries, and medical
emergencies. Students will learn about body systems, anatomy, and physiology as well as elevated standards and protocols for backcountry care including skills for bivouac and extended
patient care, methods of emergency evacuation, advanced splinting techniques, long-term
wound care, and organized incident response. Passing written and practical examinations
will grant students a WFR certification that is valid for three years. This class will involve both
classroom lecture and practical exercises that will take place outside in varying weather conditions. *Note: No previous medical training is required. See Course Notes for class meeting
times and locations.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee
information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WINT-091 Slacklining
Slacklining involves walking while balancing along a narrow, flat piece of nylon that is strung
taught between two anchor points. This class will teach tips and techniques for both becoming
proficient at slacklining as well as how to set up a slackline. As students become comfortable
with basic skills, various additional tricks and challenges will be introduced. Slacklining is, in
itself, a fantastic activity for improving balance, focus and kinesthetic awareness and also serves
as effective cross-training for many other activities that depend on these capabilities.*Note:
See Course Notes for additional details on class meeting times.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Lifetime Recreation Activities
WREC-001 Archery
This course is designed to present the lifetime recreational activity of archery in a broad perspective for future use as a recreational and /or competitive pursuit. A major objective of the
course is to develop strength in the upper back, neck and shoulder girdle. Students will be presented with the proper shooting techniques and forms. Instruction in the proper selection, use
and care of archery tackle (equipment) will be provided. Students will be introduced to the
rules, safety, etiquette of archery and archery competition. Once the fundamental skills have
been well mastered, students will participate in a variety of class competitions (field, American,
hunter, golf, clout, and flight.) Equipment provided by RIT. **Fee: A course fee applied via
SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-004 Badminton
Most people regard badminton as a gentle, noncompetitive, backyard diversion for relaxing
summer afternoon play. However, the best setting has been found to be indoors or a breezy
court. Here the shuttle cock ("birdie") can zip back and forth under great control and amazing speed: It becomes a very exciting game! Because it is physically/mentally demanding, it
is one of the most invigorating and challenging sports in the world. It is also a great reducer
of stress/ tension and a wonderful muscle-toning activity. For the competitive person, badminton offers limitless opportunity to develop skills and for others, a wonderful recreational
activity. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

187

Recreation and Wellness

WREC-006 Pickleball
Pickleball is a sport described as a combination of ping-pong, tennis and badminton. It is an
intense work out, very social and athletic as well as competitive game. It is typically played on
a badminton court with a net that is lowered to 34 inches in the middle. Players use a baseball
sized wiffle ball and a paddle, similar to a large ping-pong paddle, to volley the ball back and
forth to score on the opposing team. People of all athletic abilities can play this sport because
it is easy to learn. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-007 Basketball
This course is designed for beginner-advanced male and female students. It is designed to
emphasize basic skill development and refinement, team competition and tournament play.
Students will be encouraged to develop individualized skills of the game of basketball: Passing,
shooting, dribbling, rebounding, offensive and defensive movement techniques. Objectives of
the course are to enjoy playing the game of basketball/team competition, physical conditioning enhancement, to become more informed as to the strategies of the game and to benefit
from the sociological aspects of becoming involved with a team sport. The general format of
each class will include a warm-up, basic and advanced drills and in class competitions. *Note:
Students must be dressed in appropriate athletic attire and sneaks.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-009 
Racquet Sports
This course is an introduction of three racquet sports: Badminton, Tennis and Pickleball.
Badminton is a game played on a rectangular court by two players or two pairs of players
equipped with light rackets used to volley a shuttlecock over a net that divides the court in
half. Tennis is a game played by two or four players on an indoor or outdoor court. Pickleball
is a fast growing sport described as a combination of tennis, table tennis, and badminton. It is
typically played on a badminton court with a net that is lowered to 34" using a wiffleball and
paddle. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-017 
Advanced Pocket Billiards
Advanced Pocket Billiards can be enjoyed by many of all ages who have had a background in
basic pocket billiards and want to take their skills to the next level. The purpose of this course
is to refine the pocket billiards fundamentals one already possesses and obtaining advanced
billiards skills. Emphasis is placed on refining stance, grip, bridges, stroking and aiming and
learning advanced techniques. . Additional topics that will be refined are: Stop shots, follow,
draw, "English", position play, banks, caroms, combinations, eliminations, break shots and safety play. Games taught and played are: 8-Ball, 9-Ball, Straight (14.1) and Cutthroat. Each class
period is divided into three segments: Lecture/demonstration/practice and play. This course
also will have a competitive tournament to crown the Advanced Pocket Billiards Champion
and prepare students for advanced tournament play outside of RIT. *NOTE: All equipment is
provided by RIT and strong background experience is required.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-019 Bowling/off-campus
This course is designed for beginner, intermediate/advanced students who wish to participate in the lifetime recreational sport of bowling. The course is designed to practice the basic
techniques of bowling and covers the following: Stance, push-away, back swing, approach and
release (fundamental skills of the game). Students will learn the importance of proper ball selection and care of equipment (balls, shoes, gloves). The class will be presented with the rules and
etiquette of the game. Once averages have been established, students will be placed on teams
and will bowl as a competitive league (format) for the remainder of the term. Course held off
campus at Clover Lanes (2750 Monroe Ave, Pittsford). *Note: Directions in the SLC Lobby.
RIT does not provide transportation but car-pooling does exist.* **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-022 Diving
This course is designed to accommodate all ability levels. The fundamentals of diving will be
covered early in the quarter. Students will progress to the next ability levels at their own pace
and with the guidance of the instructor. The course objectives are: To teach basic diving safety,
fundamentals of diving, to build skill level and develop confidence to as high a point as possible. Course content includes the following areas: Approach, take off, aerial positions, twists
and entries. Students must be reasonably coordinated, with average strength and have a basic
swimming competency (should be comfortable in deep water). *Note: Materials needed: Swim
suit and towel.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

188	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

WREC-031 
Fresh Water Fly Fishing
This course introduces students to fly fishing skills which includes identifying trout species,
understanding trout behavior and trout habitat, basic entomology and hatch calendar, recognizing common artificial wet and dry patterns, tying wet and dry fly patterns, viewing some
popular trout streams in the northeast and western United States, and reading stream conditions. This course includes hands-on sessions for fly casting techniques. Equipment is provided
for students who need it (rod, reel, leader material and flies). *Note: Class meets weeks 7-15
of the with the last class meeting off site at the same regular class time. RIT does not provide
transportation.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)
WREC-034 
Flag Football
Flag football offers a chance to experience football at its best. Sport equipment will be provided.
Individual skills combine in an atmosphere of teamwork, goal attainment, leadership awareness and excitement. Skill presentation, demonstration, drill work and play allow students of
all levels to benefit from flag football activity involvement. Passing, catching, flag techniques,
offensive/defensive play, creativity, kickoffs, point after attempts, handoffs and rule review will
highlight the course. Active participation progresses fitness levels in many areas. Flag football
will be offered at various times throughout the school year (depending on instructor/ facility
availability). **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-037 Dodgeball
Re-live the glory days of summer camp and middle school by taking part in one of the fastest
growing activities on college campuses across the country. Dodgeball is a great way to exercise,
relieve stress and most importantly-have fun! This course will focus on the recreational game
of Dodgeball as it is sanctioned by many leading organizations such as: The World Dodgeball
Association (WDA), The National Amateur Dodgeball Association (NADA), the International
Dodgeball Federation (FDA) and the National Dodgeball League (NDL). Students will play the
game of Dodgeball using different rules, formats and balls, court and team sizes. This will be
an intense, competitive class but with a relaxed, open environment that will accommodate all
ability levels. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-040 
Ultimate Frisbee
Ultimate Frisbee is a non-contact disc sport played by two teams of 7 players. The object of the
game is to score goals. A goal is scored when a player catches any legal pass in the end zone of
the opposing team. The disc (frisbee) is advanced by throwing or passing it to team mates. The
disc may be passed in any direction. Any time a pass is incomplete, intercepted, knocked down,
or contacts an out of bounds area, a turnover occurs. A turnover results in an immediate change
of team possession of the frisbee (disc). Students will learn the rules, basic throws and strategies of this exciting game while developing levels of physical fitness. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-047 Golf
Beginning golf familiarizes the student with basic principles of technique, rules, etiquette,
equipment and various course layouts. Players will benefit from play alongside novice and experienced level players. Unique individual critiques, etiquette discussion, grip coverage, stance,
posture and swing planes are learned, as well as use of irons, woods and putters. When appropriate, videotaped presentations are shown. Stretching, technique demonstration and review
combine with various club hitting practice to fill fifty minutes of experiential golf education.
Professional presentation delivery and breadth of information in combination with practice,
lead to continuous improvement. Written examination tests learning levels performance, as
well as a self-performance videotape. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes
for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-050 Horseback/English
Student equitation skills, horse control, walking work, the trot and canter develop within this
beginning Horseback/English course. Moving on to higher level intermediate and advanced
courses, students learn fence jumping and fence course introduction, while further refining
equitation skills. Course objectives include riding and stable safe work techniques, developing
correct positioning, riding control and specifics dealing with a variety of horses and presented situations. Ground work education such as horse stall exiting, ground leading and correct
mounting procedures along with walking, sitting, posting and two-point positioning, walking without stirrups, trotting and cantering lead into intermediate skills. *Note: Must call
Huntington Meadows Stables to set up lesson times (872-6286) or email rboucard@rochester.
rr.com. Leave phone number and email !* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Recreation and Wellness

WREC-053 Horseback/Western
Enjoy scenic trail riding while learning how to safely work and communicate with western
trained horses at Liberty Stables in Bloomfield, NY. This class includes weekly discussions/
rides. Designed with the novice in mind, students will learn to ride at a walk, trot, and canter.
However, the variety of 15 lesson horses allow for varied experience levels. Class discussions/
demonstrations include ground and riding safety, basic care/maintenance of horses as well as
a bit of history of the human/horse relationship over the past 3000 years! With 80 beautiful
acres of rolling countryside, open fields and forested areas as well as outdoor/indoor lesson
rings, you are sure to develop your riding foundation. Attendance is key to success in this
class. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WREC-059 
Ice Hockey
This course is designed for beginning to advanced ice hockey players. Students must provide
their own skates, helmet with full face cage, hockey stick and gloves. Course objectives: To
learn the basics of equipment, safety, skating acceleration, stick handling, skating agility (forward and backward), and basic drills. The advanced classes (POWER SKATING) are NOT for
beginners! These classes will cover advanced hockey skills, including: Shooting, passing for
accuracy, advanced drills, defensive zone coverage and competitive play. If the class is above
average in ability, a session on Power Plays and Penalty Kills may be added. There is NO body
checking allowed in class. All penalties during class will be penalty shots. *Note: Students must
have their own skates and full equipment including a full face guard and helmet, gloves and full
pads.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-062 
Ice Skating
This course is designed for beginner-advanced ice skaters. Instructional emphasis will be placed
on safely learning the life-long activity of ice skating. Early in the quarter, students will be introduced to aspects of basic use and care of equipment and safety implications. Once basic skills
have been obtained, students will progress as follows: Gliding and snow plough stop; forward
glide and sculling; backward glide and sculling; forward cross-overs; short jumps/turns; two
foot spins; forward chasses; Killian hold; backward chasses waltz hold; foxtrot hold; forward
drag, bunny hop and lunge; forward arabesque; combination jumps and spins; Sal chow and
basic program development. *Note: Students may use their own skates or can rent skates at the
rink ($3.00).* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-065 Juggling
This course is designed to acquaint students with the art of juggling in theory and practice
while at the same time conditioning their minds and bodies. Course concentrates on 3 and 4
ball juggling patterns and is geared to accommodate all levels of learners. Instructor will teach
one-on-one as well as group demonstration. Clubs, rings, combination cigar boxes, scarves,
club swinging and 5 ball juggling will be taught (where appropriate to advanced students).
Personal instruction will be supplemented with juggling movies, literature and video taping.
The goal of the course is not only for each student to achieve maximum juggling ability, but also
to increase their mental concentration and physical coordination. **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-068 Racquetball
Racquetball is designed to teach skill development from beginners to advanced level players.
Focus for the beginner is on skill development and refinement, while intermediates to advanced
focus on perfecting the strokes and competitive strategies. Activity level is high. Students will
have the opportunity to develop overall fitness elements. The basic course objectives are: skill
understanding, enhancement of the social/emotional components, CV fitness, basic shots,
equipment, warm up/cool down, training and game strategies. This course meets 1-2x week
in the SLC racquetball courts. *Note: Racquets and balls are provided. Eye guards are required
and may be purchased locally. All students must bring their RIT ID to every class.* **Fee:
A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-071 
Skiing and Snowboarding Lift Ticket and Equipment Rental
This course is offered at Bristol Mountain Ski Resort on Tuesday evenings from 5 pm-10 pm.
Bristol Mountain is located at 5662 Route 64, Canandaigua, New York, 14424, http://www.bristolmountain.com. *Note: This ski pass is valid only on the designated Tuesday evenings (TBA).
A mandatory meeting will be held for all participants on Tuesday during the first week of the
Semester (TBA). Please note that ski helmets are mandatory for participation in this class. RIT
does not provide transportation however car-pooling does exist and will be discussed at the
required pre-class meeting.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill and per Bristol Mountain.
See Course Notes for course fee information. The price of this course includes rental of Skis,
Boots, Poles or Snowboard and Boots, not helmets. ** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)

	

WREC-072 
Skiing and Snowboarding Lift Ticket Only
This course is offered at Bristol Mountain Ski Resort on Tuesday evenings from 5 pm-10 pm.
Bristol Mountain is located at 5662 Route 64, Canandaigua, New York, 14424, http://www.bristolmountain.com. *Note: This ski pass is valid only on the designated Tuesday evenings (TBA).
A mandatory meeting will be held for all participants on Tuesday during the first week of the
Semester (TBA). Please note that ski helmets are mandatory for participation in this class. RIT
does not provide transportation however car-pooling does exist and will be discussed at the
required pre-class meeting.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill and per Bristol Mountain.
See Course Notes for course fee information. The price of this course includes lift ticket only,
not equipment or helmets. ** Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)
WREC-073 Soccer
Soccer, the sport of all the world, is a game of constant action. Each player involved in this game
must be able to perform as an individual, as well as be an essential part of team play. In this
class, we will cover fundamentals of ball control, trapping, dribbling, passing, heading, shooting, defensive (zone, man-to-man) techniques, offensive techniques, goal keeping and soccer
terms. In this class, we will also discuss how every team is comprised of individual skill, group
skill and team tactics. Class format will follow a warm-up session with skill practice, instruction for the day, along with mini-games in a controlled scrimmage situation. Winter offering
will be indoors. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-076 
Softball: Slow Pitch
Co-ed activity class designed for beginner to advanced players of the game of slow-pitch softball.
Class will meet outdoors on the turf field or IM field, weather permitting. During inclement
weather, class will meet in Clark gym, and play a modified game of softball: Mush- ball. Course
consists of basic fundamentals of slo-pitch softball, with "speed up" rules of 3 balls and 2 strikes;
including rules, out- field play, infield defensive skills, hitting, pitching techniques, base running, basic game strategies and umpiring. *Note: No metal spikes will be allowed. First class:
Meets indoors and consists of orientation session and instruction regarding rules of the game.
Most other classes: Outdoor drills and skill refinement.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill.
See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-080 
Intermediate Swimming
This class will take students with beginner swimming skills and knowledge to the next level
by introducing and practicing all four of the competitive Swimming strokes (front crawl, back
crawl, breaststroke, butterfly). These strokes will be practiced and refined in the lap pool formation. Basics of starts off the blocks, flip turns and treading water will be introduced, practiced
and refined. Students will progress from lap swimming of these competitive strokes to swimming for fitness by the end of the term. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-082 Tennis
Participation, enjoyment, and lifetime game appreciation fulfill class expectations. Introduction
to beginning fundamentals and skills will be covered. Objectives of the course reflect upon:
game skills, rules, etiquette, tennis appreciation, and attaining a level of play that allows competition with comparable players. Court layout, surfaces, scoring, equipment, individual skills
(forehand, backhand, serve, the volley, overheads) and footwork allow progression into preliminary games and round robin play.*Note Indoor Tennis periodically are now offered in the
Winter/focuses on tennis drills aimed at increasing cardiovascular strength/breathing and
advanced footwork. Students will do circuit training, court positioning and continuous feeding
drills.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WREC-083 
Tennis: Intermediate-Adv.
This course is designed for students who have a fairly strong background in the sport of tennis
and are interested in taking their skills to the next level. There will be a brief review of tennis
fundamentals and skills but class will move quickly to more advanced drills and competitions.
Objectives of the course focus on: challenging game skills, review rules (singles and doubles),
review etiquette, and attaining a high level of play that allows for competitive tournament play
and matches. Students should have a strong background in tennis court layout, surfaces, scoring, equipment, and strong individual skills (forehand, backhand, serve, the volley, overheads)
to easily enter class competitions. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for
course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WREC-085 Volleyball
This course designed for all levels of players of the lifetime recreational and competitive game
of volleyball. Course evaluation is based on attendance, effort, improvement and enthusiasm.
The basic course outline includes instruction and rehearsal of basic volleyball skills (under
hand pass, over head pass, spike and serve); rules; basic formations/ positions/strategies; and
tournament play. Students will have ample time to practice/refine basic-advanced skills of the
game. Tournament play will take place in the form of a random team selection from class to
class. *Note: Students should dress in athletic wear, with comfortable sneaks and knee pads (if
desired). Advanced section offered periodically.* **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See
Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Undergraduate Course Descriptions	

189

Recreation and Wellness

WREC-086 Wallyball
Wallyball is a fast-paced sport that combines skills from handball, tennis and volleyball. It is
played on a racquetball court with a volleyball sized rubber ball with 2 or 4 players per side.
The concepts are similar to volleyball but with an element of surprise because players can hit
or spike the ball off of the side walls. This sport will test your hand-eye coordination, balance,
strength, power and agility. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course
fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-091 
Table Tennis
Table tennis is the 2nd most popular sport in the world. It is a sport played by all ages. At the
beginner level it is recreational. At the top level, it is a world class sport requiring years of
dedication and top notch training/fitness! It combines technique, speed, spin, power, touch,
smarts and concentration. Course content includes: basic strokes, footwork, drills, strategies
and rules. Games and matches will also be played, based on practice drills, and then a tournament near the end of the quarter. All equipment is provided. *Note: Must wear sneakers.*
**Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-092 
Advanced Table Tennis
Table tennis remains the 2nd most popular sport in the world. At the beginner level it is recreational. This course is designed for players with a strong table tennis background who want to
play the sport at a higher level. Basic skills will be briefly reviewed, while advance techniques will
be introduced early on. At the top level, this is a world class sport requiring years of dedication
and top notch training/fitness! An advanced player must be easily able to combine technique,
speed, spin, power, touch, smarts and concentration. Course content includes: Reviewing basic
strokes, footwork, drills, strategies and rules but then delving into advanced techniques early
on and begin competitions.. Competitive games and matches will regularly be played, and then
a high level tournament will take place near the end of the term. *Note: All equipment is provided, but students must wear sneakers. * **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course
Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WREC-094 Curling
This course will focus on the Olympic sport of curling. Curling is a competition between two
teams with 4 players each. The game is played on ice, and the teams take turns pushing a 19.1kg
stone towards a series of concentric circles. The object is to get the stone as close to the center
of the circles as possible scoring more points than the opposing team. Instruction will cover
all rules, equipment, safety, basic-intermediate skills and competitions. *Note: All classes will
meet off campus at the Rochester Curling Club on 71 Deep Rock Rd. (11 minutes from campus).
RIT does not provided transportation. For directions call 235-8246 or www.rochestercurling.
com. * **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.**
Activity, Credits 0 (Spring)

Martial Arts
WMAR-001 Karate
Course designed to help students increase their stamina, flexibility and basic techniques in selfdefense. Main course objectives: become more physically fit to enhance self-esteem; develop
self-confidence to help students deal with everyday situations; relieve stress by providing an outlet to "blow off steam"; and to gain self-discipline to enable students develop better study, work
and life habits. Course content: calisthenics; stretching; upper body/lower body exercises; kata
(a prearranged set of movements which deal with being attacked). **Fee: A course fee applied
via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMAR-006 
Self Defense
This empowering self defense course, designed for students is designed to help students increase
their stamina, flexibility, and basic fundamental techniques needed to feel confident in the ability to protect oneself. In this positive, non-threatening environment, the class will teach proper
use of hands and feet as weapons, how to fend off multiple attackers, as well as techniques that
can be used against a person with a knife, gun or club. Main course objectives: become more
physically fit, enhance self-esteem and gain necessary awareness of potential dangers, develop confidence and self-discipline to help deal with everyday situations, relieve stress, provide
resources needed to develop better study, work and life habits. **Fee: A course fee applied via
SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMAR-018 
Kung Fu: Advanced
This Kung Fu class allows students to utilize their current skills and obtain more advanced
skills to further gain strong self- discipline and enhanced confidence. Kung Fu is an excellent
method to change your fitness level and see improvements in overall well-being by developing offensive and defensive abilities. Students will utilize their current knowledge of Kung Fu
philosophy, history and analysis to move to the next level of competency and rank. Students
should have prior background experience in the basic skills of Kung Fu that will be important
in the success at an advanced level. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes
for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

190	

Undergraduate Course Descriptions

WMAR-021 
Kung Fu Open Practice
This class is designed to provide extra practice time for students outside of their regular class
and to give students the opportunity to receive more individual instruction on techniques
they have questions about or feel they need help with. Typically class will run for about an
hour and 20 minutes, starting out with a set of warm-up exercises, which will then be followed by a review of techniques or 1-on-1 bouts with a senior instructor present. The format
of the class is open, providing the opportunity for previous students to rejoin and refresh on
techniques they may have learned several quarters, or years ago. All are welcome to register.
**Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity,
Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMAR-026 
Kung Fu Rank Test Review
A typical review class will be about 1 hour and 20 minutes. The class consists mainly of lectures of philosophy, history, and analysis of Kung Fu techniques. This class is required for any
students wishing to test for their first rank, but would be beneficial for any student wishing
to learn more in the depth knowledge of this style of Kung Fu. **Fee: A course fee applied via
SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMAR-036 
Tai Chi Slow Paced
This course is designed to teach 24 forms of Tai Chi movements with popular meditation ideas.
Focus on creating strong internal energy and strength. Pursue and maintain good health, the
"qi" sensations. Learn to balance the body with gentle movements that improve health conditions with each progressive section. Tai Chi was created 400 years ago and repeats simple
movements again and again in certain frequency, allowing students to develop a special routine
for maximal energy, skills and string internal power for application in defense and self-healing.
First time learners are welcomed. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for
course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMAR-066 Sparring
This exciting Martial Arts course is designed to help students increase their stamina, flexibility
and basic techniques in self defense, with emphasis on controlled fighting bouts (2 students
matching their skills against each other). Main course objectives: develop confidence through
physical fitness, relieve tension by providing a healthy forum for stress relief and gain the self
discipline to enable students to lead a more productive lifestyle. Course content: calisthenics,
stretching, and punching and kicking drills (include bag work and sparring with other students) to promote the development of footwork, distancing timing, focus and strategies needed
to be a skillful fighter. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See Course Notes for course fee
information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMAR-071 
Brazilian Capoeira
This exciting martial art course is one of the few, if not the only one still in existence, native
to Americans, developed in Brazil by the descendants of African slaves brought there by the
Portuguese during the era of the Atlantic Slave trade. Capoeira is characterized by dynamic
body play, kicking, sweeping, takedowns, aggressive feinting and head butt movements. It is
played within a circle of onlookers and fellow participants, called a "Roda". The game is played
when two contestants enter the circle and begin to "ginga" ("to swing" in Portuguese), launching various attacks, counters and initiating defense. **Fee: A course fee applied via SFS bill. See
Course Notes for course fee information.** Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

Military Sciences
WMIL-006 
Air Force Leadership Lab
This ROTC course is an Air Force Leadership Lab. Formerly Air Force Physical Training II, this
revised course is designed to provide the students with a foundational understanding of the
benefits, privileges and opportunities as well as responsibilities associated with an Air Force
commission. Students will also be introduced to Air Force customs, courtesies, environment,
drill, flight movement and ceremonies. *Note: Must be enrolled in the RIT ROTC Air Force
Program.* Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)
WMIL-021 
Army Leadership Lab ROTC
*Note: must have successfully completed Army Conditioning Drills and must be enrolled in
RIT Army ROTC.* Activity, Credits 0 (Fall, Spring)

AUG
BLC
BOO
BRN
CAR
CBT
CLK
COL
CPC
CRS
CSD
CSI

GVD

SLA

T

GVC

August Center
Bausch & Lomb Center
James E. Booth Hall
Brown Hall
Chester F. Carlson Center for Imaging Science
Center for Bioscience Education & Technology
George H. Clark Gymnasium
Color Science Hall
Campus Center
Crossroads
CSD Student Development Center
Center for Student Innovation

RIT CAMPUS MAP

RED

Genesee River

GVP

GVP

LAC

SUS

EAS
ENG
ENT
GAN
GLE
GOL
GOR
GOS
GVC
GVD
GVP
HAC

S

CBT

HLC

ORN

ENG

INA
INB

COL

R

LOW

GOS

UNI

BOO

VIG SAN

CAR

GLE

F

E

GAN

WAL

LBR

George Eastman Hall
Engineering Hall
Engineering Technology Hall
Frank E. Gannett Hall
James E. Gleason Hall
Golisano Hall
Gordon Field House and Activities Center
Thomas Gosnell Hall
Global Village Way C
Global Village Way D
Global Village Plaza
Hale-Andrews Student Life Center

CRS

USC
CSI

GOL

ENT

J

Andrews Drive

ROS

East River Road

BRN

G

Turf
Field

BLC

EAS

Scottsville Road

SAU

CPC
SMT

CLK

RIA

Tennis
Courts

AUG

HAC

GOR

Hugh L. Carey Hall
Institute Hall A
Institute Hall B
Laboratory for Applied Computing
Lyndon Baines Johnson Hall
Liberal Arts Hall
Max Lowenthal Hall
Monroe Hall
Orange Hall
Gene Polisseni Arena
Red Barn
Frank Ritter Ice Arena

U

POL

HLC
INA
INB
LAC
LBJ
LBR
LOW
MON
ORN
POL
RED
RIA

MON

WEL

D

N

Athletic
Fields

ROS
RSC
SAN
SAU
SLA
SMT
SUS
UNI
USC
VIG
WAL
WEL

M

LBJ

Andrews Drive

C

K

Lewis P. Ross Hall
Rosica Hall
Sands Family Studios
Student Alumni Union
Louise Slaughter Hall
Schmitt Interfaith Center
Golisano Institute for Sustainability
University Gallery
University Services Center
Vignelli Center for Design Studies
Wallace Library
Welcome Center

CSD
RSC

Periodicals
Rochester Institute of Technology

www.rit.edu
twitter.com/RITnews

facebook.com/RITfb

